

      ____
 ____|    \
(____|     `.___________________
 ____|       _|_________________
(____|     .'    *
     |____/.         * ･ ｡ 





Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 20071ORGANIZATION UNBOUNDThe Spiritual Architecture of OrganizationsWarren NilssonI. IntroductionThere is no outside, no inclosing wall, no circumference to us.- EmersonInvoking JimMy father-in-law, Jim, is a great destroyer of walls. Every house he has lived in will bearme out. Each is filled with reclaimed open space, the air laced with the cheerful scars ofwhat has been removed. To create such space, a man needs to have a strong desire to seethe world – the whole thing – from the chair where he sits.He also needs a hammer.Once, eating breakfast in his underwear, it occurred to Jim that the wall between thekitchen and the dining room was an extravagance. He put down his spoon, took ahammer from a drawer, and swung without comment, tearing off random patterns ofsheetrock. He didn’t take the entire wall down – he had the weekend for that – justmarked it enough to remind everyone that here was where a wall ought not to be. Thechildren ate their cereal, unappalled.Jim uses a gentler hammer with people. He is drawn to searching for connections wherethe rest of us see only boundaries. A difficult family member or guest makes him curious,not anxious. And his conversations with even the most strident or hostile people areunguarded. To talk with Jim is to wander. And in the wandering he will find and gatherthings that you do not. He will find them because he looks for them. And he will gatherthem because he wears the right boots.Perhaps Jim is like this because he is a landscape architect. He is used to a certain way ofwalking and a certain way of seeing, after all. He is highly trained. But it might also be amatter of faith. Maybe Jim is simply the kind of man who never sees a wall that hebelieves in or a field that he doesn’t.◊The Sociology of the PossibleThis paper is about organizational boundaries, the seemingly sensible divisions we makebetween one thing and another, or one person and another, as we pursue ourorganizational aims. We rely on boundaries for structure and coherence. We rely on themfor meaning. The boundary seems to be the basic geometrical ground of organization, thestructural dynamic that allows any organization to exist in the first place. I will explorethe consequences of this geometry in terms of its confounding effect on humanengagement. And I will consider the possibility that there is another kind of geometry, anunbound geometry that nurtures the human spirit while maintaining a profound anduseful organizing power of its own.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 20074This paper is also about organizational faith. The theologian Paul Tillich describes faithas the “dynamics of ultimate concern” (1957). He sees faith not as a particular set ofbeliefs but as a stance toward the world, a determination to engage with the things thatmatter most however one names those things or wherever one finds them. Faith, in thissense, is engagement. And there is a long-echoing complaint in the literature of industrialcritique that it is precisely this kind of engagement that organizations lack. We do notfind organizational life deeply engaging, because organizational spaces are not built insuch a way as to connect us with what we most care about. If this complaint is true, and Ithink it is, it is a particularly troubling one in an age that relies on organizations to frame,provoke, and embody larger patterns of social and institutional change. If something in anorganization’s DNA prevents it from pursuing ultimate meanings, we are unlikely to seesuch meanings blossom in the broader social world. At times, then, (especially in thelatter part of the paper) my arguments will seem targeted toward social changeorganizations – those organizations that concern themselves explicitly with socialmeanings. But ultimately I think every organization is a social change organization.Every organization creates or recreates the relationship patterns that thicken into culturesand institutions – the patterns that we have come to think of as society.Three questions, then, are at the heart of this paper:1. What can we say about the fundamental dynamics of human engagement?2. What are the conditions that allow such engagement to flourish in organizationalsettings?3. What is the relationship between organizational engagement and broader patternsof social purpose or meaning?I will argue that the answers to these questions have everything to do with the ways inwhich we create, maintain, and rely upon boundaries as the structural and ideologicalground of organizational life.This is largely a theoretical paper. Much of its framework will be presented deductively.But I confess that I originally arrived at many of these ideas inductively by working inthe field with a small number of extraordinary organizations. I will draw upon two ofthese organizations in particular. They will serve as examples, helping to clarify thethemes I explore. They will also, I hope, infuse the paper with a sense of possibility –even plausibility – that is at least somewhat earned. Ultimately, I am less concerned withdescribing how the world works than with describing how the world could work givenwho we are and what we know about the nature of social structuring. The sociology atwork here is not the sociology of the given, but the sociology of the possible. Theorganizations that have helped form the ideas in this paper are organizations that teach uswhat we might be.EngagementI realize that I have not yet said exactly what I mean by the word ‘engagement.’ I amusing the term phenomenologically to describe an experience or perceived state of being.To engage is to connect. We are always connected to something, of course – people orWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 20075places or ideas or feelings of some sort – but colloquially, when we say we feel engaged,we mean that we are connected in a relatively deep and ultimately positive way to whatwe are experiencing. We feel present. We feel interested. We feel part of. So let’s say thatthe first level or dimension of engagement is simply this feeling.To anyone interested in this sort of experience, Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi willimmediately spring to mind. Csikszentmihalyi has researched something that seems to bejust what I am describing. His interest is in what he calls “flow” or “the psychology ofoptimal experience” (1990). Flow is primarily concerned with task engagement (thoughCsikszentmihalyi does describe cases in which people can be in flow simply by being).Flow is associated with a profound connection to the task or to current experience, and itgenerally involves a sense of concentration, alertness, satisfaction and, creativity with aloss or diminishment of the sense of time passing. While flow is certainly a kind ofengagement, the following rather curious result of Csikszentmihalyi’s research suggeststhat there may be more to engagement than simply being in flow.Csikszentmihalyi’s research involved exploring the nature of “positive experiences” in avariety of settings. One common factor in flow experiences is that they involve clear andfocused goals. They also involve highly challenging tasks that are matched by the skillset of the person performing the task. Unsurprisingly, then, the majority of the positive oreven peak experiences people described took place at work (Csikszentmihalyi andLeFevre 1989). Work after all is where we typically encounter focused, challengingactivities that match our skills. In contrast, people generally described their experiencesduring leisure time negatively. Their overall sense of happiness tended to be much lowerduring free time. What’s curious is that despite these clear experiential descriptions,people generally indicated that they would rather be at leisure than at work.Csikszentmihalyi interprets this paradox to mean that people are culturally influenced notto “heed the evidence of their senses.” That is, people pay less attention to what theyactually enjoy than to what they are supposed to enjoy: in this case, leisure. There may besome truth to this interpretation. But what if people are more perceptive thanCsikzentmihalyi gives them credit for? Perhaps there is something inherently unfulfillingabout the way we’ve come to define work, no matter how pleasurable or positive it mightfeel at the emotional level. And perhaps there is something inherently more meaningful inthe spaces we create via “leisure,” no matter how challenging such spaces feel or howmuch anxiety they provoke. If what we are after is not a temporary feeling of enjoymentbut a sustained connection to essential things, then there may be more to deepengagement than the pursuit of flow. And organizations as they are generally configuredmay preclude this sort engagement. A quick glance at the last two or three hundred yearsof critiques aimed at industrial organization will bear this out.Critiques Related to DisengagementThe industrial revolution propelled us into an organizational age. Organizations are nowthe dominant institutional form we confront and the dominant instrument of institutionalreproduction and change (Mintzberg 1989; Scott 1998; Weeks and Galunic 2003). SinceWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 20076industrialization, however, a persistent chorus of voices – artistic, philosophical,sociological, political, economic– has expressed a fundamental discomfort with thenature of industrial organization. Most of these critiques are well known. They representa wildly diverse set of scientific, cultural, social, and metaphysical perspectives on theworld. But despite this heterogeneity, a simple common thread runs through them: thatwe have become alienated – divided from important things – and are the worse for it.Since ‘alienation’ is an overburdened word, let’s call this general theme ‘disengagement’.One version of this theme is that we have become disengaged from ourselves. Critics ofcapitalism industrial organization have been much concerned with the dehumanizationand loss of autonomy experienced by the majority of workers. Taylor (1989) frames thisas “the conflict between disengaged instrumentalism and the Romantic or modern protestagainst it.” A central theme in Marx (1978), for example, is that labor - the productive,creative capacity in each of us - has come to be seen as something external to us, an alienobject that can be bought and sold. Such alienation deprives us of agency and also of thekind of interior space we need to lead meaningful lives. Marx, of course, associates thisloss with the working classes. Some strands of critical organization theory (e.g., Perrow1986) share his emphasis, assuming that agency still largely resides in upper managementand ownership and that people in those classes are not deprived of dimensions ofinteriority in the way that the lower classes are. The earliest critiques of capitalismassociated worker disengagement with job specialization and with hierarchical powerrelationships via the wage system (Dolan 1971), two foundational elements of industrialorganization. Modern organizational scholars and sociologists have continued to explorethis theme, notably in the 1950’s and 1960’s, and have found a correlation between thistype of disengagement and degrees of centralization and formalization (Aiken and Hage1966).More multi-hued critiques suggest that the disconnection from the self is not just aproblem for workers but for everyone participating in industrialized life. Nineteenthcentury romantic poets and philosophers in England and Germany developed the conceptof self-expression, the unique and subjective flowering of inner exploration, as a centralpersonal, social, and spiritual good. They saw modern economic organization asantithetical to such expression (Abrams 1953). The lack of self-expression available to usin organizational space is a common complaint among modern critics as well (e.g.,Hochschild 1983; Whyte 1994), many of whom make no distinction betweenmanagement and labor in terms of this lack. Such critiques focus on the loss of variousparts or dimensions of the self. People in industrial organizations are seen as havinggiven up access to crucial energies, emotions, interests, talents, yearnings, and intuitions.Words like ‘wholeness’, ‘integration’, and ‘authenticity’ are the tonic notes for suchcritics. And to live in the role-rigid social and organizational spaces we have created is tolive lives that are inauthentic and less than fully human (Taylor 1991).A second major version of the theme of disengagement focuses not on the self but on theexternal world, suggesting that we have become disconnected from each other and fromour natural environment. Nineteenth century Romantics decried the loss of traditionalcommunity ties and of the soul’s natural reverence toward and communion with nature.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 20077The former complaint was mirrored in many community-based and religious movements;the latter was taken up in the early twentieth century by the burgeoning conservationmovement, which would later become the environmental movement (Hawken 2007).Today, the dominant new social movements focused on corporatism, globalization, andthe environment (Crossley 2003) all explore this same sort of external disengagement.Large organizations are seen as exploiting workers and communities (Mander andGoldsmith 1996; Klein 2000; Shiva 2005) as well as ecosystems (Daly, Cobb et al. 1989;Hawken 1994; Daly 1996; Hawken, Lovins et al. 1999), largely due to the fact that thepeople making decisions are disconnected from the impacts of those decisions. Framingthese arguments is a meta-critique associating disengagement with an inability to sustainhealthy democracies (Marcuse 1964; Taylor 1991; Korten 1995; Saul 1995).Disengagement from the self and disengagement from the world are not unconnectedproblems. One way they can be linked is through the concept of moral agency. Taylor(1989) sees the self as essentially the quest to discover a location in moral space. That is,the self is defined by its evaluative relationship with the good. This relationship does nothave to be closed, ideological, or even conscious. It can be exploratory and tacit, but to bea self is to be involved in a narrative that is ordered by some qualitative idea of what isgood, right, worthy, etc. Srinivas (1999) argues that organizations deprive workers(managers, in this case) of their empathic humanness – a dynamic he calls“androidization” – leaving them morally indifferent, incapable of exercising moralagency. Inward disengagement leads to outward disengagement.This dynamic is illustrated in the following Paul Hawken anecdote (Korten 1999).Hawken is a well-known entrepreneur, activist, and writer who focuses on corporatesustainability issues. He describes a consulting session facilitated by a friend of his inwhich engineers for a large chemical company were asked to break into teams to design aspaceship capable of leaving the earth for 100 years and returning with all of itsinhabitants thriving. The teams’ focus was to be on the physical and social systemswithin the spaceship, not on the mechanics of the ship itself. The teams presented theirwork to each other and voted on the winning design. The winning spaceship/ecosystemhad many interesting features, but perhaps the most striking thing about it was that thekinds of products that this chemical company produced were not allowed on the ship.Things like herbicides and pesticides were rejected out of hand by the chemical engineerswho spent their lives manufacturing them, since a healthy ecosystem on the ship wouldneed weeds and bugs and might not be able to metabolize such chemicals anyway.Despite this result, I imagine we can safely assume that the engineers went back to workthe next day (as most of us would) and continued to build their elegant but potentiallycatastrophic compounds. Here, self-fragmentation is evident – the habit of divorcingvarious parts of ourselves from each other so that in our daily lives we do not have toconfront anything resembling an “ultimate concern.” Here we are faithless.And in fact, Tillich, the theologian who has framed faith as the dynamics of ultimateconcern, explicitly sets his idea of faith against any type of personal fragmentation.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 20078Faith as ultimate concern is an act of the total personality. It happens in thecenter of the personal life and includes all its elements. Faith is the most centeredact of the human mind. It is not a movement of a special section or a specialfunction of man’s total being (1957: 4).When a chorus of voices includes Marxists, theologians, organization theorists, poets,and environmentalists, I find myself paying attention. This chorus tells us that ourorganizing patterns constrain our ability to engage with ourselves and with each other,leaving us disconnected from the things that are most important in life. What are thosethings? Specifically, each critic might offer a different answer, but in that they are allfocused on engagement, we might say that engagement itself is of ultimate concern. Theyall implicitly associate their versions of ultimate good with full connection to the selfand/or complete connection to each other (the natural world being included in that“other”). This idea might seem tautological at first, a way of saying that connection toourselves and to each other is important so that we can be in touch with what mattersmost and what matters most is connection to ourselves and to each other. But I think thistautology is, in fact, revealing, as we shall see by exploring these ideas from a moredirectly spiritual perspective.Two Spiritual ThemesMitroff and Denton’s research on spirituality in the workplace (Mitroff and Denton 1999;Mitroff and Denton 1999; Mitroff 2003) involved surveys and interviews of some 200North American business executives. The most surprising thing about their research isthat the interviewees described spirituality in strikingly similar ways. The authors admitthat they had expected to find divergent interpretations of the meaning and importance ofspirituality, but this wasn’t the case. Certain themes turned out to be almost universal.And at the core of this shared version of spirituality were two deceptively gentle ideasthat, when pushed a bit, actually become quite dizzying in their absoluteness. In thecontext of our disengagement discussion, however, they will sound familiar.The first of these ideas is that spirituality involves the whole person. Almost allrespondents felt that spirituality was not a particular function or part of the personalitybut an integrating force that drew on all aspects of the self. Respondents believed thatspirituality at work required the kind of workspaces that allowed all dimensions of theself (rational, emotional, intuitive, pragmatic, humorous, etc.) and all skills and intereststo emerge when appropriate. To be spiritual in this sense means to be completelyintraconnected, to be in communion with all parts of one’s being. I’ll call this quality‘fullness’ in that it has to do with access to the fullness of the self.The second idea has to do with the belief that spirituality involves a feeling ofconnectedness to the whole of life, to everyone and everything participating in existence.To be spiritual here means to be interconnected, not provisionally, but entirely. And notfunctionally, but essentially. In fact the deepest expression of this theme involves morethan simply being connected to the whole. It involves seeing the whole in oneself andoneself in the whole. I’ll call this theme ‘oneness’.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 20079There is a burgeoning interest in spirituality in the organizational studies literature(Garcia-Zamor 2003) and in trying to understand its place in a scholarship tradition thathas traditionally been largely focused on organizational effectiveness rather than on moretranscendent goals (Benefiel 2003). Other studies of spirituality and the workplacereinforce Mitroff and Denton’s findings on what I’m calling fullness and oneness (Kingand Nicol 1999; Primeaux and Vega 2002; Gull and Doh 2004).The parallels betweenfullness and oneness and the industrial organizational critique that I’ve outlined areobvious. But these interview responses are not simply reflections of our particular culturein our lurching, industrial age. Something like fullness and oneness can be found at thecore of virtually every major spiritual tradition. In the major institutionalized religions,fullness and oneness are implied if not explicit. Huston Smith (1991) points out that whatlinks the seemingly divergent views on the nature of reality in Hinduism, Buddhism,Confucianism, Taoism, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, as well as the in the “primalreligions,” is a common emphasis on the complete integration of all things and on the“sheer immensity of the human self.” The mystical branches of these and other traditionsgo even further, making startlingly similar assertions about the essential unity of realityand claiming that the whole of this reality can be found inside of the self, preciselybecause the small, isolated self is, in fact, an illusion (Happold 1964; Underhill 1990).Radical EngagementMy argument then is that social critiques based on some version of inner and/or outerdisengagement offer an implicit vision of total engagement as a central human aspirationor good and that this vision mirrors the emphasis on fullness and oneness at the heart ofboth traditional and contemporary understandings of spirituality.Lest I be accused of sleight-of-hand in putting social critics – many of whom aredecidedly a-spiritual – and spiritual traditions awkwardly together in a makeshift room ofmy own, let me say more about what I mean by spirituality for the purposes of this paper.I believe that the theme of disengagement can only be understood as a spiritual theme,but I mean this in the broadest, least controversial way. Disengagement is a state in whichwe have lost touch with what is central to us, with what it means to be human. The spiritin question is the human spirit, and when we fail to feed it we naturally become disspirited.Whether one defines this experience biologically, psychologically, socially, ormetaphysically is unimportant from this perspective. That there is something essential atthe core of human experience need not provoke metaphysical debate.1 What is striking tome is that while the spiritual “content” varies among the streams of thought I havementioned, the spiritual dynamic of engagement is very similar. There are certainly otherperspectives in the world based not on engagement but on competition and survival. Butsocial critics (generally concerned with power, justice, freedom, etc.) tend not to rely onthese perspectives, since they would leave them nothing to critique. If competition andsurvival are at the root of our experience, from what stance can we claim that a particular1 I recognize that some would argue that there is no such “essence” or “core.” This paper will probably beof little interest to them except perhaps as a lively irritant. I am content with Taylor’s above-mentionedargument that it is impossible to order oneself as a ‘self’ without some implicit values-based dimension.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200710arrangement of winners or survivors is the wrong one? – perhaps a functional stancefocused on the overall survival of the species or planet, but most critics go much fartherand are much more normative than this. So I think my claim of a shared vision amongsocial critics and spiritual traditions is generally supportable if not impregnable.What I want to emphasize again is the absoluteness of this vision: the call for engagementwith all parts of the self and with everything and everyone. Literatures that seem to offerinsight into engagement – whether they focus on job satisfaction (Glisson and Durick1988), organizational commitment (Mathieu and Zajac 1990; Swailes 2002),organizational creativity (Drazin, Glynn et al. 1999), or the psychology of community(Chavis, Hogge et al. 1986) – are almost always provisional. They are concerned withnarrowly operationalized types of engagement in limited contexts (i.e., to particularorganizations, activities, or groups of people). If what we seek, however, is the totalizingset of connections described above, then these provisional engagements will leave usultimately unfulfilled. If the critics (implicitly) and the mystics (explicitly) are right, thenwhat we long for is radical engagement: total engagement, at the root level, witheverything. Note that this does not imply that one can achieve such a totalizingengagement. Only the mystics claim to have done that. The rest of us are a bit raggedyfor such heroism. But our inability to actualize the ideal does not mean that its pursuitcan’t guide our relationships. I will quote Emerson (19xx) again: “Our life is anapprenticeship to the truth . . .” We can be satisfied in the apprenticeship, in the seeking.So there you have the postulate upon which this paper rests: that fullness and oneness arewhat we seek and that when we are cut off from this seeking we become dispirited. Theimplications of this idea for organizational life are profound. In the next section, I’llexplore these implications from the perspective of the literatures on identity andorganizational structure. I will argue that the fundamental social-psychological andstructural mechanisms we use to organize ourselves are inalterably opposed to fullnessand oneness. Until we recognize this contradiction, I believe most of our attempts tocreate engaging, inspiring organizations will fail, though they may appear to succeed fora time. I then develop an organizational approach – a spiritual architecture, if you will –that at least attempts to make room for the pursuit of radical engagement. I hope, by theend, it will seem plausible that this architecture is not only engaging but also fruitful. Itmay offer us not just a more fulfilling experience of organizational life but a moreeffective and meaningful result: a way to build the things we need to build and tackle thesocial problems we need to tackle in newly energetic and creative ways.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200711II. Structure UnboundWhat is structure? It is a relatively persistent pattern of relationships among the elementsthat make up a given system. Structure implies some sort of perceptible regularity tothese relationships, whether the “elements” we are talking about are the numbers in amathematical sequence, the rooms in a house, or the people in an organization. Structuredrelationships repeat themselves over time and/or across space. This repetition is whatmakes them patterns. The “rule” connecting the various elements might be hard to grasp.The pattern might not be obvious at first. But to speak of a structure is to speak of itsunderlying relational rules: “2(n-1),” “the walls are at right angles to the floors andceilings,” “the marketing department takes its direction from the vice-president forcorporate strategy,” etc.The Geometry of the BoundaryRoles and Groups as BoundariesOrganizational structure, then, is a persistent pattern of relationships or interactionsamong members of the organization. Scholars who study organizational structuregenerally focus on patterns related to authority and decision-making, communication, andbehavior (Donaldson 1996). Ranson, Hinings et al. (1980) contrast two streams ofliterature, one that focuses on formal structures and is in the Weberian tradition(“framework”), and another that focuses on emergent, informal structures and isassociated with early organizational theorists like Merton, Selznick, Gouldner, and Blau(“interaction”). They argue that the division between framework and interaction isartificial, and they draw on Giddens and Bourdieu to show that the two types of structureare mutually constitutive. And indeed, research emphasizing the structuring role playedby belief systems, frames, logics, meanings, etc. is burgeoning (Lounsbury and Ventresca2003).The literature contains a dizzying array of approaches, few definitions, and multiplelevels of analysis. Forgive me if I forgo the speed-bump of a complete literature review,but I want to get straight to the point. Despite the seeming multiplicity of structuraldimensions and dynamics at work in organizations, all of them, insofar as they are social,are invoked through the two most basic social-structural constituents, the role and thegroup. This may sound reductive, but it is hard to come up with a counter-example if wethink about structure as it is portrayed in the organizational literature. A role is a set offunctional parameters describing what one does, with whom one communicates, and thedecision-making scope one has. A group is a set of associational parameters describing towhom one belongs.Formal organizational charts are clearly built around roles and groups, but all of thestructuring elements generally cited, whether formal or informal, express and maintainthemselves through roles and groups. A routine, for example, can only exist as anelement of social structure if it is embedded in a specific role or seen as an overallidentity commitment by a group. If a certain behavior – say, taking out the trash –happens regularly (i.e., structurally), it happens either because certain people areWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200712expected to do it (it is part of their role) or because it is seen as a requisite for belongingto the group and therefore everyone does it. Authority is similarly assigned and executedthrough role and group patterns, as is information flow. Cultures and belief systems,which are also structural mechanisms, may or may not involve elaborate roledifferentiation, but strong group identification (at least in terms of “believers” and “nonbelievers”)is often, if not always, a result of a shared belief that is held firmly enough tohave a structuring effect on interaction.Before exploring the relationship between role-group structures and radical engagement,it is important to understand that roles and groups are implicit limits or boundaries.Boundary building and maintenance is generally seen as a foundational social process forestablishing structured modes of relationship (Lamont and Molnar 2002), andorganizations are highly territorial contexts, both formally and psychologically (Brown,Lawrence et al. 2005). A role might tell us what we will do, but it seals us off from otherpossibilities. It hints at a cavernous space filled by all of the things we will not do.Similarly, a group might seem to be a friendly collection of souls with similar skills,goals, or interests. But more powerfully, a group is a relational territory, and when suchterritories solidify, members of the group find it increasingly difficult to connect topeople inhabiting “foreign” groups. From this perspective, then, organizational structureinvokes a limiting set of intra-connections (connections with various aspects of ourselvesas we inhabit particular roles) and inter-connections (connections with each other as weinhabit particular organizational groupings).The boundaries that this type of structuring depends upon are not simply abstract limitsthat exist primarily on paper and carry little meaning into our substantive experience ofthe world. We experience organizational boundaries very tangibly, even viscerally(Diamond, Allcorn et al. 2004). Such experience is reflective of social structuring ingeneral, according to much of the social-psychological literature on identity. Thebounded relational dynamics at work here are a key element in the generation of the selfand the derivation of meaning, as we will see shortly. The fundamental contradiction ofthis way of seeing the world with what I have described as the fullness and onenessinherent in radical engagement should be apparent at first glance, but a brief look at thesociological literature on identity will make this contradiction even starker.Identity Boundaries and Social StructureThe various theories of identity in the literature can be divided into three categories: thosethat frame identity as a personal construct, those that frame it as a relational construct,and those that frame it as a collective construct (Brewer and Gardner 1996). Before the1970s, most theories focused on personal identity, but since then there has been a greatdeal of attention paid to relational and collective identities (Cerulo 1997) and an overallemphasis on identity less as a psychological phenomenon than as a social one (Howard2000; Polletta and Jasper 2001). Below, I explore two of the most important identitytheories: Identity Theory, which is a relational explanation, and Social Identity Theory,which, though not a theory of collective identity in its own right, relates personal identityto collective categorical frames.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200713Identity Theory: Understanding RolesIdentity Theory (McCall and Simmons 1966) was first developed in the 1960s and 1970sby scholars working in the symbolic interactionist tradition of George Herbert Meade.Symbolic Interactionism is an interpretive approach to identity and behavior that focuseson the way that people generate meanings through social interaction and then use thosemeanings to guide their actions. Identity Theory extends this tradition by focusing veryspecifically on the ways in which role identities function as mediating concepts betweensocial structures and individual experiences of the self. People know who they are bywhere they fit in the role-segmented social landscape. Not every personal quality relatesto a role of course, only those that differentiate one person from another and map onto asocial function. A ‘breather’ is not a role, because everyone breathes, and breathing is nota social function. Personal characteristics like hair color may differentiate us, but they arenot roles (unless they happen to take on a socially located meaning – blonds as the rulingclass, for example). Note that the “function” need not be a concrete activity (e.g.,cooking, clerking). It can be more abstract and symbolic – a “Queen” who represents Godto her “subjects,” for example.Identity theory, then, explores the ways that people use roles to understand themselvesand to relate to each other. Three features of Identity Theory are notable for our purposes(Hogg, Terry et al. 1995; Stets and Burke 2000):• Salience: People take on multiple roles – father and baker perhaps. In any givensocial context, some roles will be seen as more salient than others and thusactivated. Salience can be relatively fixed. I may always identify more stronglywith being a father than being a baker. But salience can also be highly contextual.Around other bakers, my role as a father might be relatively meaningless to me,even if in general it forms a powerful part of my core set of identities. Mostimportantly, once a role is accepted as salient or activated in a given situation, aperson’s mode of interaction and relationship is essentially circumscribed orbounded by that role, although not completely. McCall and Simmons (1966) likenrole interaction to improvisational performance (c.f. Goffman 1959).• Complementarity. A role is a relational construction. It defines who a person is interms of how she relates to others. Roles only mean something in complement toother roles. ‘Father’ makes sense only in relation to ‘son’ or ‘daughter’ or‘mother’. ‘Baker’ makes sense only in relation to ‘butcher’ or ‘customer’. Notethat the first example, ‘father’, literally cannot be defined without reference toson/daughter/child. Whereas ‘baker’ can certainly be defined simply as one whobakes bread. However, in Identity Theory, the role identity only means somethingwhen it differentiates someone from those who produce other kinds of food (orfrom those who buy the food, or supply the ingredients, etc.). From theperspective of a socially derived identity, ‘baker’ does not describe just anyfunction, it describes a comparative and interdependent function.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200714• Performance Evaluation. People evaluate themselves and each other based howwell they “perform” their roles (according to their own interpretations of sociallygiven role criteria). That is, self-esteem and self-efficacy are directly related torole performance, making role boundaries particularly strong.In terms of possibilities for radical engagement, the picture painted by Identity Theory isdiscouraging. If most social interaction operates via narrow roles that confine us tolimited and largely pre-defined aspects of ourselves, we generally experience littleopportunity for anything like true self-exploration or expression in a social context.There is no question of fullness, or even its happy pursuit, in such a social world. At best,we are able to inhabit a variety of roles that allow us access to multiple parts of ourselves.But given that each social interaction will tend to be dependent on only one (or a smallhandful) of these roles at any given time, there is little chance for meaningful integration.It becomes difficult, within our relationships, to pursue energies or dimensions of the selfthat transcend particular roles. Being so compartmentalized, we are unable to explore orexpress the more interesting and mysterious parts of ourselves that would cross our owninterpretive boundaries.Another important dynamic to understand in any role system is that people come to beseen, and to see themselves, instrumentally. The function associated with the role is whatmediates and defines the relationship. To me (and to yourself) you not only doaccounting, you are an accountant. Accounting is what you are for. It is both the centerand the limit of my experience of you. I might acknowledge intellectually that you aremuch more than an accountant. But if my daily interactions with you are rigidlycircumscribed by your balance sheets and income statements, I end up thinking of youprimarily in terms of what you can do for me and for the organization. You are aninstrument, with no fundamental value other than your usefulness. Perhaps I seem to bestating this idea to strongly. Most of us acknowledge that accountants are people too. Butthe role dynamic is not simply about how we describe each other. We are perfectlycapable of recognizing the limitations of our descriptions, after all. The role dynamic isabout how we interact with each other. That is, I may believe at some superficial levelthat you are a whole person with essential value of your own unconnected to what youcan do for me, but if I relate to you mainly in terms of what you can do for me, mysuperficial belief won’t matter much. Insofar as roles are our primary mode ofinteraction, we will continually reinforce a sense of compartmentalization andinstrumentality in each other.Roles may constrict an individual’s sense of self, but role systems do provide us with amechanism for connecting to others, and there is empirical support for this (Yuki 2003).Since roles are rooted in complementarity, there is no particular reason that a given rolesystem couldn’t be at least theoretically open to everyone. The mode of interactionbetween various roles may be narrow and functional but there is no apparentcontradiction here with the second keystone of radical engagement – oneness or completeinterconnection. However, given that an organization, like any social structure, is notsimply a role system but also a group system, radical engagement does in fact meetanother barrier.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200715Social Identity Theory: Understanding GroupsSocial Identity Theory and the closely related Self Categorization Theory are socialpsychologicalexplanations of the identity dynamics of people in groups (Abrams andHogg 1990; Hogg, Terry et al. 1995; Stets and Burke 2000). Whenever a personperceives herself to be part of a particular group, she begins to identify with that groupand the group identity begins to take on something like an objective existence (Hogg andAbrams 1988). That is, she perceives group characteristics, however they might bedefined, as comprising an essential part of who she is (her fundamental nature, her placein the world, etc.). Being a Smith, or a woman, or an IBM employee, or an accountant,becomes a central dimension through which the self is understood. Social identificationhas three key features (Turner 1999; Deaux and Martin 2003):• Homogeneity: The social category is perceived as exaggeratedly homogenous.Empirical studies show that as identification with the category becomes stronger,the perceived similarity of group members increases. One of the majormotivations for group identification appears to be uncertainty reduction; anotheris to increase relative self-esteem (Hogg and Terry 2000).• Comparison: Identification with the social category is further reinforced bycomparing it with other social categories. Psychologically, we seem to reinforceour social identities not only by exaggerating homogeneity within the group, butby exaggerating the homogeneity of other groups and the differences betweenthose groups and our group. Groups are not seen as complementary or relational.They are seen as fundamentally distinct and disconnected. Moreover,comparisons are made along dimensions that favor the self-identified group anddiminish the out-group. People reinforce their identification with the in-group bynegatively evaluating out-groups. In a sense, Social Identity Theory is not just atheory of social groups or social categories, it is a theory of social classes, in thatthe groups or categories are always evaluated against each other vertically. Agiven group will be seen as more attractive, powerful, etc. than another andpeople will make the mental effort (and often the political/institutional effort) toplace their category in the highest possible position. What’s particularly strikingabout this comparative/evaluative mechanism as it has been tested empirically isthat it kicks in right away with even the first movement toward groupidentification. In one laboratory study, people were divided into random groupswith no obvious shared connection within the given groups. Despite the lack of apre-existing, observable social category, people began to create such a category.They identified with their group, began to exaggerate its homogeneity andcompared it to other groups primarily along dimensions that were favorable totheir group. (Tajfel 1970). In other words, the simple fact of being placed in agroup created an immediate and fairly severe social-psychological barrier. InSocial Identity Theory, a group is not simply a way of relating to fellow groupmembers or feeling good about ourselves, it is a way of disconnecting from andfeeling negatively toward other groups. The more people interact via their groupWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200716identities (intergroup) and the less they interact as individuals (interpersonally),the more extreme and reductive the social identity dynamic becomes (Turner1999).• Stereotypicality: Power springs less from functional ability or centrality than fromthe degree to which an individual embodies the stereotypical characteristics of thegroup. The more representative of the group one is, the more one is esteemed,since the stereotypical dimensions of the group have been psychologicallyexaggerated and given positive evaluative content. For example, suppose that“engineers” are seen (by themselves) as preferring simple, practical clothing tostylish dress. Even though dress has nothing to do with engineering ability,engineers will hold a person who dresses “like an engineer” in higher regard thana person who dresses differently.In short, the psychological mechanisms involved in group identification, whichapparently occur automatically, seem directly to contradict our deeper yearning foroneness. If we engage with some people through strong group identification, wesubconsciously distance ourselves from the majority of others.To summarize Identity Theory and Social Identity Theory in terms of structural effects,roles are parts we play in relation to other parts of the social structure and they contradictour pursuit of fullness. Social groups are categories we occupy in contrast to othercategories and they contradict our pursuit of oneness. The following table reiterates thekey dynamics of these two modes of identity construction:Identity Theory Social Identity TheoryDisciplinary roots Sociology Social PsychologyMediator between individualidentity and social structureRole Salience Group or CategoryHomogeneity & SalienceMode of relationship Complementarity Comparison/ContrastEvaluation via Role Performance SterotypicalityIdentity Boundaries and Organizational StructureTurning our attention back to organizations, the situation is even more doubtful. Anorganization is an especially constricted role structure. Herbert Simon (1997) points outthat organizational roles are “highly elaborated, relatively stable, and defined to aconsiderable extent in explicit and even written terms.” In Simon’s view, it is thisstability, this “predictability” that is largely responsible for enabling “organizations todeal in a coordinated way with their environments.” Similarly, organizations rely onextremely elaborate categorical groups, all of which provoke the social identitycomparative mechanism: project teams, departments, divisions, and units; blue collarsand white collars; professionals and support staff; seniors, juniors, associates, and interns;shifts and crews; employees, customers, suppliers, competitors, shareholders, etc.(Ashforth and Mael 1989). It is clear that our organizations are built not only fromspecialization, but from segmentation (see e.g., McDowell, Batnitzky et al. 2007).Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200717If roles and groups are the two foundational dimensions of organizational structure, wecan think of an organization as essentially an identity matrix – an arrangement of roleidentities and group identities. Each person is located somewhere in this identity matrix.What’s more, because organizations are by definition purposeful, functional entities,organizational role and group identities tend to reinforce each other. Consider anaccountant. She comes to identify strongly with her role as someone who monitors andreports on the financial operations of the firm. It is as an accountant – not as someonewith four sisters or who plays the cello – that she interacts with other people in the firm.At the same time, this identity as an accountant is also a social category. She feelsconnected to the idea of accountancy and emphasizes her similarities with otheraccountants. She views other groups (lawyers, clerical staff, maintenance people) throughpsychological lenses that tend to reinforce the uniqueness and superiority of accountants.Thus the accounting department may seek to occupy a privileged position within theorganization, or perhaps her identification with accounting will supercede heridentification with the organization as a whole (as a group) and she will work for“accounting power” in a larger context through professional institutions of various sorts.Her identification with the category ‘accountant’ will, of course, reinforce heridentification with the functional role, which will in turn reinforce her identification withthe category, etc.. The circle is an ever-tightening one, and not altogether comfortable.The net effect is that, as we inhabit organizations, we draw upon ever narrower parts ofourselves through which to relate to the world, and we feel connected to ever fewerpeople as our category boundaries reinforce separateness.This dynamic holds true not only for formally defined roles and groups but for informalones as well, though the psychological effects may be more subconscious. It is even trueof structural framing concepts that we might not think of as defining roles or groups atall. For example, Knights and Morgan (1990; 1991) present a particularly interestingdiscussion of the way in which even apparently generic functions like “strategy” areactually identity frames. They see the “strategic actor” identity not as the result of arational, functional, organizational approach to problem-solving (they reject such acategory all together), but as the result of a discourse driven by the power and securityimpulses of managers.So far, we’ve been examining organizational structure in a fairly simple, static way – anorg-chart version of identity theory, if you will. But these identity themes hold up whenviewed through more complex structural lenses. Take Mintzberg’s (1979; 1980) work onorganizational structuring. He defines five coordinating mechanisms at the heart of thestructuring process. I consider each in turn.• Direct supervision involves coordination via someone with line authority exertingdirect control over a given set of work decisions. It is common in smallentrepreneurial firms and in large “machine bureaucracies” (Mintzberg’s term fororganizations dominated by the upper line management in the technical core). Wecan view direct supervision as a particularly rigid sort of role structure for thepeople under supervision. Their role is simply to obey, to follow orders. In theirlack of agency and expression, very few of their human qualities can be accessedWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200718while they are at work. But even “supervisors” in such a structure can come to seethemselves largely in terms of their own authority. (Knights and Morgan’sdiscussion of strategy, referenced above, bears this out.) That is, they play the roleof the authority figure, the decision maker, and may become disconnected fromother aspects of themselves that may not fit this role (perhaps fear, or curiosity, orcompassion, or creative expression, for example). Returning to Srinivas’s theoryof “androidization,” though managers might experience greater material benefitsthan those they supervise, they suffer a similar constriction of agency and selfexpression,perhaps suggesting that Knights and Morgan’s view of “strategizers,”while an interesting image of identity processes, does not necessarily result in realpsychological/spiritual benefits at the deepest level. Supervisory structures giverise not only to role constriction but also to group identification. Managers andworkers come to see themselves as fundamentally different types of people. Atworst this leads to deep mistrust and competitive political maneuvering, at best itresults in a polite distancing. Either way, the boundary has been set and socialidentity processes of self-categorization take root.• Standardization of outputs involves precise specification of work product withoutsignificant control over input or processes. Workers are fairly independent in thiscase, at least in terms of methods. In their ability to adopt various approaches totheir work, they have some room for creativity and exploration of differentaspects of the self. Ultimately, though, their role as producer is quite narrowlydefined, particularly with respect to the purpose or meaning of their own workand how that purpose relates to their own modes of expression. The role of“producer” of a particular type of output is as constricting as most other roles interms of identity. And since the specifications of output are dictated by otherpeople (technical staff presumably), there is an immediate categorical dividebetween those who decide and those who execute. The category or class dynamicthen is likely to be much the same as in a structure based on direct supervision. Infact, the categorical boundary may be much stronger in this case. Directsupervision, after all, allows some room for dialogue and feedback (depending onthe culture). The line between the deciders and doers may blur in practice thoughthe line between ‘manager’ and ‘worker’ is unlikely to. However, in an outputstandardizedstructure, the deciders are physically removed from the doers for themost part. Specifications are transmitted formally after technical analysts decidewhat they should be. So the boundaries between these two broad categories oforganization member can be quite severe.• Standardization of skills (and knowledge) is the central coordinating mode oforganizations that rely on highly skilled/trained workers. It is often associatedwith professional organizations (e.g., law firms) and therefore has a significantextra-organizational, institutional component. Because the roles in question are soheavily institutionalized, again they are likely to draw on or even leave room foronly limited parts of the self. A lawyer may have many more kinds of rolerestrictions on her comportment, appearance, communication style, manner ofthinking about problems, and general approach to work than even the mostWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200719closely supervised factory worker. This is because a lawyer inhabits a role withcenturies of institutionalization undergirding it and years of required trainingdesigned precisely to maintain its institutional parameters. It is true that a lawyerhas a certain kind of freedom that someone in a supervisory or outputstandardizedstructure does not. In that sense, a lawyer has the agency to berichly expressive, but it is only within a very narrow domain of thought and actionthat such agency exists. The same institutionalizing factors that constrain aprofessional’s role description also clearly delimit a very precise social category.One is either a lawyer or not. Professions are among the strongest modes ofestablishing us/them social boundaries (Lamont and Molnar 2002). Withinorganizations the distinctions between professionals and other types of staff arestrict. Professionals often occupy privileged positions not only with respect tosupport staff, but also with respect to top management. (Think of doctors andhospital administrators, or professors and university presidents.)• Standardization of work processes is a structuring pattern that relies on precisedescriptions of workflow and technique, often right down to very small timeintervals. There is little need for constant supervision or for training andindoctrination since there is almost no latitude for behavioral decisions. Workersessentially function as machines, with no room to respond to particular urges,ideas, or curiosities of their own. And the categorical distinction between thosewho decide and those who do not is probably even more severe than in asupervised structure or an output-standardized structure.• Mutual adjustment, which Mintzberg associates with small, simple organizationsand with very large, complex organizations, is a self-organizing, organic form ofstructuring in which methods, processes, outputs, styles, etc. are continuallygenerated and adjusted as people interact with each other. Mintzberg wasprefiguring in a general way the development of complexity theory as it applies toorganizations (Wheatley 2001; Holbrook 2003). Self-organization would seem tobe the least restrictive of the structuring approaches in terms of role and groupboundaries. In terms of engagement, the key issue then becomes what sorts of“adjustments” are organization members making to each other. Adjustment maybe very instrumental, based on the need simply to get some sort of predefinedwork done, in which case everyone is locked into an instrumental “producer” role.More elaborated, informal role patterns may arise over time. Group boundariescan also arise organically – at a minimum the basic boundary between those whoare doing the work in question and everyone else inside or outside of theorganization. The self-organization at the root of complex adaptive systems doesoffer the potential for a different sort of organizing – one based less on boundariesthan on open, mutual exploration - but it does not guarantee that role and groupidentities won’t come into play in the usual constricting ways.The mutual adjustment inherent in self-organizing systems may seem to open up newpossibilites for a deeper sort of engagement than we usually find in controlled andcentralized systems, but we are now presented with a new problem. We can’t design selfWarrenNilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200720organizing systems at the level of form, as this would be a contradiction in terms. At thesame time, there may be room for system-level agency within a self-organizing system atthe level of intention. That is, we can self-organize via any number of relationaldynamics: selfishness or fear as well as love or creativity. The spiritual architecture of theresulting system will largely be defined in terms of the relational mode through which itwas built. A self-organizing system cannot guarantee radical engagement, but it mayoffer us new possibilities for its pursuit. To understand these possibilities, and to seesimilar possibilities even in more formally structured contexts, we need to explore therelationship between identity and organization more carefully at the root level.Institutional theorists offer us an opportunity to do just that, as they study how and whyindividual identity impulses coalesce into broader, institutionalized social patterns.Mining Institutional Theory: Anxiety as StructureInstitutional theories exist in many disciplines, but we’re concerned here with the “old”and “new” institutionalism in sociology and organization studies. Institutionalsociologists study intersubjective social phenomena that seem to have taken on a fact-likeor rule-like status, thereby turning into semi-objective, stable, pervasive social structures(DiMaggio and Powell 1991; Scott 2001). The phenomena in question might be politicaland organizational forms, rituals and codes of behavior, mental frames, or relationshiptypes and groupings. From this perspective, constitutions, bureaucracies, modes ofgreeting or worship, conceptions of private property, and nuclear families are allexamples of institutionally given social structures. The old institutionalism of Selznicksaw values as the primary driver of institutionalization; the new institutionalism of Schutzand Berger and Luckmann sees cognitive maps of “reality” as the chief institutionaldrivers (Scott 1987). That is, in the old institutionalist view, a structure like anorganization becomes institutionalized when it is so infused with values as to acquire apersonality and worth (and therefore persistence) beyond its purely functional purpose.To the new institutionalists, a structure is most fully institutionalized when it iscognitively submerged, taken for granted as just another inescapable piece of reality.Most institutional scholars, particularly in organization studies, work at a relativelymacro level of analysis, often focusing on fields of organizations that share a giveninstitutional paradigm. But the founding threads of institutional theory are concerned withthe connection between the psychological/behavioral micro-patterns of individuals andlarger structural patterns. These threads offer us insight into why institutional structures ingeneral, and organizations in particular, are largely maintained via role and groupboundaries. We’ll turn to two threads in particular, the classic organizationalinstitutionalism of Selznick and the new institutional sociology of Berger and Luckmann.Old Institutionalism: The “Whole Person” Puts in an AppearanceSelznick (1948; 1984a; 1984b) was among the first theorists to explore organizationalstructuring from a non-Weberian perspective. Selznick does acknowledge the importanceof the Weberian abstracted role system in which “it is necessary for the relations withinthe structure to be determined in such a way that individuals will be interchangeable andWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200721the organization will thus be free of dependence upon personal qualities” (1948: 25). Buthis main preoccupation (like ours) is what happens when people “interact as wholes” (26)with this role system. Like Barnard (1968), Selznick is very attuned to the fullness ofhuman nature, the non-rational, multi-dimensional qualities, emotions, and relationalcommitments that make us up. He sees, however, a powerful tension between thisfullness and the organization’s instrumental, rational role system.From the standpoint of organization as a formal system, persons are viewedfunctionally, in respect to their roles, as participants in assigned segments of thecooperative system. But in fact individuals have a propensity to resistdepersonalization, to spill over the boundaries of their segmentary roles, toparticipate as wholes. The formal systems (at an extreme, the disposition of“rifles” at a military perimeter) cannot take account of the deviations thusintroduced, and consequently break down as instruments of control when reliedupon alone. The whole individual raises new problems for the organization,partly because of the needs of his own personality, partly because he brings withhim a set of established habits as well, perhaps as commitments to special groupsoutside of the organization. (1948: 26)His tone grows Shakespearean: “ . . . the non-rational dimensions of organizationalbehavior . . . remain at once indispensable to the continued existence of the system ofcoordination and at the same time the source of friction, dilemma, doubt, and ruin” (25).However, this tension is essential. The “reciprocal influences of the formal and informalaspects of organization” are what give the organization its “concrete structure” (28). Indescribing informal patterns, Selznick consistently mention cliques, ties of friendship,class loyalty, power groupings, and other types of external commitments. These mightsound familiar to us by now, as he is essentially describing the various role and groupidentities a person carries with her into the organization. So even though he is movingwell beyond the organizationally defined identities implied in Mintzberg’s categories ofstructuring, his own structuring dynamics are rooted in a similar, though socially broader,identity matrix. In that sense, Selznick’s “whole person” is not an authentic portrait offullness exactly: more like a collection of predefined social identities.Selznick goes on to say that these identities can be absorbed into the organization in sucha way that they both strengthen the organization’s formal goals and expand theorganization’s raison d’etre. “Organizations become institutions as they are infused withvalue, that is, prized not as tools alone but as sources of direct personal gratification andvehicles of group integrity” (40). He develops his concept of institutionalization todescribe the process by which an organization comes to be held together or “integrated”by such values, which may be explicitly defined in formal structures, but are moregenerally sustained via informal cultural patterns. He sees this process as largelydefensive and frames it as analogous to the psychological process by which individualsintegrate various commitments. Selznick is among the first to see clear “structuralfunctionalhomologies” (30) between organizations and persons. Since the organization,like the person, is primarily concerned with self-preservation, it adopts “certain repetitivedefense mechanisms” (30), to wit, growth, ideologies, and cooptation. Cooptation is oneWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200722of Selznick’s signal contributions; it is “the process of absorbing new elements into theleadership or policy determining structure of an organization as a means of avertingthreats to its stability or existence” (34). Put another way, when threatened by otherorganizational or political structures, the organization redraws its boundaries to include(and thus disarm) the threat. The value commitments of the organization shift, either byincluding new people/organizations directly in governance or by altering theorganization’s mission.Over time, the organization begins to craft an identity that allows it to survive in itssocio-political environment. Although Selznick emphasizes the unique “character” thateach institutionalized organization creates, he is clear that this character is essentially arole, a particular location in social space adopted as a defensive posture and shaped bythe pre-existing role categories available in that social space. A similar defensive postureleads the organization to align itself with various social macro-groups. Thus, forSelznick, both individuals and organizations build their identities via boundaries.However, while he clearly sees the organizational identity process as analogous to theindividual identity process (he frequently uses individual analogies to explainorganizational dynamics), he does not systematically explore the link between the twolevel of analysis. He mainly adopts an organization’s-eye point of view.New Institutionalism: The Cognitive TurnNeo-institutional theory (Meyer and Rowan 1977; Zucker 1977; DiMaggio and Powell1983; Tolbert and Zucker 1996; Scott 2001) explores this individualinstitutional/organizational link more clearly. Berger and Luckmann (1967) give perhapsthe clearest description of what many institutional sociologists take to be the emergentprocess of institution building. Institutions are born when habitual (repeating) humanactivity is cast into patterns that are reciprocally acknowledged. Activity here includesboth actions and actors. Habitual actions are typified in routines. Actors performing suchactions are typified in roles. You and I notice that you are consistently gathering sticksand I am consistently cooking meals. “Stick gathering” comes to be framed in just theway that you do it and you come to be framed as a “stick gatherer.” “Cooking” and“cook” are similarly framed. And meanings (perhaps safety or health or livelihood ornurturing or affection, etc.) become embedded in these routines and roles. Over time, asthe origins of cooking and stick-gathering fade from memory and as more peopleparticipate in their ongoing typification, the activities, their meanings, and the rolesassociated with them become both objective (separate from the individual subjects whocreated them) and cognitively submerged (we begin to take them for granted, forgettingthat there is any other way to think about them or approach them).2 Such objectificationand cognitive submergence are the primary characteristics of institutionalization. As apattern of activity or a role becomes institutionalized, it begins to be taken for “reality”2 This description of proto-institution building is of course reductive, particularly as it seems to dependupon pre-existing “selves” who in some sense build institutions. Many theorists, notably Giddens (1984),see the relationship between structures and individuals as embedded, recursive to the point where it makesno sense to even talk about an “individual ” or a “self” (psychologically, not biologically, of course)without positing a concurrent social structure.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200723and it is increasingly difficult to think about it. At times it is difficult even to see it.(Note: the preceding illustration is my own synthesis and simplification of the neoinstitutionalistdescription of institutionalization.)At the heart of this process is not decision-making but pattern-making or, using Weick’sterm, “sense-making” (1995).We recognize certain kinds of activities and then connectthem. A pattern is something we create by paying particular attention to experiences andthen creating a mental or ritual category to contain those experiences. As Weick says,“People discover their own inventions” (15). But few theorists have much to say aboutwhy we cast particular activities and their associated meanings into patterns. Surely wedo not ascribe institutionalizing patterns to all repeated activities. If the stick-gathererabove scratches the left side of his head every morning before gathering sticks, we won’tnecessarily even notice this, let alone recognize it as a meaningful pattern. Clearly, we donot typify all of our habits. Some seem to us beneath notice – they are personal, orunimportant. Others may never even register in our consciousness. So why do we noticeand then typify the particular kinds of things that we tend to institutionalize? Why are we– collectively/intersubjectively – paying attention to some things and not others? What isit that we use to decide (whether consciously or unconsciously) what will enter into ourpattern-making awareness?Giddens (1984) is one of the few theorists to offer an answer to this question. He saysthat the underlying principle directing our attention and actions is anxiety, “control ofwhich suggests itself as the most generalized motivational origin of human conduct” (54).Few scholars offer as clear a description of the motivational roots of social structure. Iwould argue (and did in the first part of this paper) that radical engagement is a secondfoundational “generalized motivation” and is available as a guide if we so choose. Butlooking over our institutional landscape, anxiety certainly seems to be winning the war.Intuitively, a great number of our visible institutions do seem designed to protect usagainst something or other: social programs to relieve hunger, regulations to ensure thatmedicines aren’t dangerous, legal mores to prevent lawyers from betraying their clients,organizational governance structures to prevent shirking, stealing, heedless decisions, etc.The focus seems to be not on where we want to go but on where we’re afraid we’ll endup if suitable protections aren’t in place. An institution from this perspective is apsychological solution to a perceived problem. We experience a general anxiety aboutour own safety and/or identity. We pay attention to the things that relieve that anxiety.Then we shape these things into patterns, allowing us to feel that the problem has beensolved in a stable, relatively persistent way. Selznick’s focus on defensive processes hintsat something like this dynamic. Current neo-institutional scholars focusing oninstitutional fields have developed more varied descriptions of institutionalizationprocesses than Selznick’s, but they too implicitly support an essentially defensive modeof structure creation, replication, and maintenance. They describe the ways in whichorganizations fight to preserve themselves and grow by adopting or shaping institutionalpatterns in order to strengthen their perceived legitimacy (see e.g., Elsbach 1994; Greve1995; Suchman 1995).Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200724Why are boundaries (here roles and groups) the building blocks of defensive structures?They relieve us of anxiety by constricting our decision-making landscape, narrowing thescale and scope of our relationships, and making the behavior of others (and of ourselves)more predictable. They also provide a way of distinguishing between good and bad andthen insulate us from whatever we have labeled bad. (See, for example, Allcorn’s (1995)discussion of organizational culture as largely anxiety driven.) Note that if we adoptGiddens’ views on structuration, we don’t need to see either the psychological or thesocial/institutional structures as primary. They feed, constrain, and define each other. Inmany ways they are the same thing: our impulse toward bounded identities is expressedin our organizational forms, and the geography of our organizations is reproduced dailyin our own minds. Selznick’s homologies are, in fact, inevitable, because social systems(or organizations) and individuals are mutually and recursively created and defined. Aslong as an organization’s primary impulse is to preserve itself, it will adopt an essentiallydefensive stance toward the world, including its own members. It will be constructedprimarily via boundaries and will be inhospitable to radical engagement.The “Whole Person” Meets the Human Relations SchoolInstitutional theory and Giddens’ related structuration theory are almost entirelydescriptive. While these theories offer a great deal of insight into how institutions andorganizations are created and maintained, they do not concern themselves with theproblem of engagement or with any problem that would require a shift in the way that wehave, until now, generally organized ourselves. The Human Relations School oforganization theory takes a different approach. The Human Relations School comprises acollection of literature that, in contrast to organizational theories based on the economicportrait of rational man, focuses on the emotional and social needs of workers.Beginning with Elton Mayo’s work in the 1930s and 1940s, the Human Relationsapproach is unapologetically prescriptive, championing various methods of reorganizingourselves to account for the psychological complexities of human nature (Scott 1998).With its focus on leadership, group dynamics, motivation, and job satisfaction, theHuman Relations School has been influential; it was responsible for creating and framingmuch of the early conversation in what we now call Organizational Behavior andOrganizational Development (Perrow 1986). It seems at first glance to be closely alignedwith the theme of this paper: human engagement in organizational contexts. However,despite appearances, the Human Relations School departs substantially from what we arecalling radical engagement. This departure is revealing.Critiques of the Human Relations School (which are voluminous) are twofold (Perrow1986; Scott 1998). First, it is seen as inauthentic and instrumental: a superficial attempt topacify workers and increase productivity without disturbing the existing socio-politicallandscape. There is considerable evidence for this point of view. Mayo himself wasardently opposed to political or workplace democracy and viewed the average person asan unreliable judge of his own affairs let alone the good of society (O'Connor 1999). Hebelieved all forms of agitation or social protest sprang from the psychologicaldysfunction of the agitator. In raising funding for his own research from large businesses,Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200725he positioned his work as a non-violent way to pacify a recalcitrant and misguided laborforce. While not as blatant, other important Human Relations theorists share similarlyinstrumental views. McGregor (1960), for example, begins his classic overview ofHuman Relations through the lens of “Theory X” and “Theory Y” by stating outright:“One of the major tasks of management is to organize human effort in the service of theeconomic objectives of the enterprise . . . Successful managements depends – not alone,but significantly – upon the ability to predict and control human behavior” (3-4). He goeson to claim that prediction and control are quite possible if one only adopts theappropriate scientific tools (which he will, of course, present in the ensuing chapters).The second main critique of the Human Relations School is that most of its theoriessimply aren’t true. Methodological critiques and counter-demonstrations abound (Perrow1986). While the Human Relations portrait of the human may be more dimensional thanthe purely economic portrait, it is still extremely reductive, attempting to find directcorrelations between organizational phenomena (e.g., productivity) and a small numberof narrowly defined metrics. Consequently, conclusions based on fieldwork are oftenhighly contestable and far from clear even on their own terms.I mention the Human Relations school here, because I want to make it clear that, in myview, a fundamentally spiritual state like engagement cannot be viewed through asimplified behavioral lens, nor can it be tamed and made to serve, unquestioning, theorganization’s goals. One of the barriers to studying engagement is that most prescriptivescholars have quite happily adopted the instrumental point of view. They see their rolealmost exclusively in terms of making organizations more effective with respect to theorganization’s formal goals (though this viewpoint is somewhat less dominant in Europe)(Scott 1998). I have defined radical engagement as essentially the pursuit of ultimatemeaning. One can’t make the goal of “ultimate meaning” subsidiary to some larger goal(e.g., organizational profitability), since it then immediately ceases to be “ultimate.”There are scholars in the Human Relations tradition who have taken a non-instrumentalapproach. I’ll briefly highlight one, Frederick Herzberg, because his work illustrates afinal, seemingly insurmountable problem for radical engagement in organizationalsettings. In Work and the Nature of Man (1966), Herzberg calls into question theassumption that behavioral psychologists have a significant role to play in increasing theefficiency and profitability of enterprise – the assumption upon which most of the HumanRelations School is based.The fact is that the increase in profits that the psychologists can effect at any onetime is slight in comparison with the effects of the engineers, marketing expertsand sales department. This is not to minimize the proven practical results ofpsychological understanding and psychological tools, but my experiences havedemonstrated to me that mangers and other workers, while seeking practical helpwith business problems, are also eager to learn from psychologists what theirown jobs and lives are about. This seems a more warranted and valid area forinvestigation and study by behavioral scientists. (viii)Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200726Herzberg goes on to make the still-radical claim that organizations are here to servehumans and not the reverse.The ‘instrumental’ man finds his greatest happiness in being an unattachedexpert. In rereading this description, one recalls the name of Adolf Eichmann.(42). . . man is protesting not merely the treatment society accords him but the veryconception of his nature as it has been fostered by the prevailing institutions. Heseems to demand a more realistic appraisal of his nature than the myths abouthim that have so conveniently and over so long a period been provided. (viii)Although society speaks of man’s achieving his potential, we are actuallyretarding human achievement. The problem of achievement (or present lack of it)is central to the subject of this essay. Industry must realize that it is one of thedespoilers of man’s efforts to achieve happiness – in spite of management’s mostsincere attempts to do just the opposite . . . My task is to offer a definition ofman’s total needs, one that is consistent within the world of work. (x)Herzberg’s prescriptions for organizational change are grounded in the belief that workshould primarily be designed around “motivational” dynamics related to self-expression,learning, and growth rather than “hygiene” dynamics of safety, financial security, equity,etc. Hygiene has to be attended to to avoid worker dissatisfaction, but motivation isnecessary for real satisfaction. We can think of hygiene here as all those factors related tophysical and psychological self-preservation. To focus mainly on hygiene is to adopt thekind of defensive stance discussed above. Motivation, on the other hand, is not aboutdefense. It implies an open, unbounded sort of growth and exploration. Like most HumanRelations theories, motivation-hygiene theory has been challenged empirically, but whatis important for our purposes is Herzberg’s overall stance. He seems to be asking (andanswering) the very question at the heart of this paper.What are Herzberg’s prescriptions? He offers two central principles, and they are bothstructural. First, he proposes that a “motivation division” of management be added andgiven equal weight to the (already implicitly existing) hygiene division of management.The motivation division would operate largely from a non-instrumental (or at least lessinstrumental) perspective based on the personal growth and development of eachemployee. Motivation staff would “plan and review the growth potential of all jobs”(187). A “teaching objective” of this division “would be to alter the basis of loyalty to thecompany from that embedded, in a sense, in hygiene to that of a more mature loyaltybased on self-fulfillment” (176). Herzberg’s second structural principle is “jobenlargement.” He means this both horizontally and vertically. The tasks associated with agiven job would be more varied and complex, calling for knowledge and creativity. Andthe decision-making role of the worker would similarly be enlarged, as these broader jobboundaries would necessitate a greater degree of autonomy. Herzberg’s job enlargementis essentially role enlargement.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200727Why then is Herzberg criticized in much the same way that most Human Relationstheorists are? His perspective has been influential and perhaps helpful in many ways, butthere is no sense in which the modest results of his prescriptions live up to the radicalambition of his goals. I believe that Herzberg has identified the problem of organizationalengagement in a compelling, if dated, way. But his solution relies on the same boundedrole/group geometry that this paper challenges. We are offered no alternative geometry.Job enlargement does not transcend role boundaries, it simply expands them. His rolesmay be broader and more flexible, but they remain the fundamental structural buildingblock of the organization. And his new group, his “department of motivation,” simplyreinforces several socially identified distinctions (e.g., manager vs. worker, expert vs.subject, “hygienist” vs. “motivator,” etc.).If even the most direct and heartfelt challenges to our current organizational paradigmsfail to develop meaningful structural alternatives, we may find ourselves wondering if theanswer to the question, “Can organizations be radically engaging?” is, “No.” Perhaps anorganization is necessarily a bounded thing, built on principles immovably opposed tofullness and oneness. If organizations are institutionalized via our deepest anxieties,won’t the social structures we develop in response to those anxieties necessarily beconstructed via identity boundaries? One might easily reach the conclusion, based on theliterature reviewed above, that organizations are inalterably dis-engaging from a spiritualperspective. Maybe there is only one geometry.And yet . . .Santropol RoulantI first stumbled into Santropol Roulant grudgingly enough. I was looking for anorganization with which to do some pilot ethnographic work around the concept ofengagement (see Nilsson 2006). My partner, Tana, suggested a small meals-on-wheelsorganization she had heard about as being a particularly lively place. On the surface, fewtypes of organizations could have been less attractive to me. There are thousands ofmeals-on-wheels programs in North America preparing meals and delivering them to thehomebound. Most of them rely heavily on volunteers. It is a valuable and unfortunatelynecessary service, but there is nothing particularly innovative about it. Such programs runnow very similarly to the way they ran decades ago when they were first conceived. I waslooking for something sexier, more visionary. Still, I kept hearing about SantropolRoulant’s astonishing ability to attract volunteers, particularly young people. Theorganization did no advertising and almost no outreach, but at any given time it had some200 volunteers actively engaged in its work. It also was known for focusing onintergenerational community building and the personal development of both clients andvolunteers. Though the meals were important, they were seen as a vehicle for deeperchange, not as an end in themselves.So I poked my head in the door one day, and in some ways have never left. What I foundwas a place brimming with vitality, enthusiasm, and a general sense of invitation, butwithout anything cliquish in its culture or dogmatic in its mission. All sorts of peopleWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200728interacted with the organization in all sorts of ways. Yet they described their experiencesthere in very similar terms. Most saw Santropol Roulant as a place where they couldexplore parts of themselves and interact with other people in particularly profound, yetunforced ways, all while connecting to a larger sense of community and possibility thatitself was gentle, non-ideological, and often even unarticulated. People talked about akind of freedom – the freedom to be oneself, to interact with others in simple andsatisfying ways, and to participate in the work precisely in the manner and to the degreethat they wanted to. This is not an empirical study, so I’ll not say much more about theplace at the moment, but as I began observing and talking to people about theirexperiences at Santropol Roulant, two structural themes became very clear.First, though the organization did have fairly traditional roles on the surface (executivedirector, client coordinator, etc.), the roles were extraordinary supple, changing not onlywith each new person hired (or volunteering) but with each subtle shift in a givenperson’s ideas and curiosities. People were actively encouraged to bring different partsof themselves to work, whether those parts fit their roles or not. They were alsoencouraged to cross over into other roles, to start new projects, and in general to followtheir own energies and intuitions. Roles, at most, were temporarily useful tools. At times,they seemed almost vestigial. More important than such task flexibility, however, wasthat the ways in which people related to each other personally seemed to have almostnothing to do with their roles at all. Volunteers often didn’t even know whether theperson they were talking to was staff or another volunteer and even when someone’s titlewas clear, in almost no sense did that title mediate personal interaction. This was my ownobservation, but it was also reinforced many, many times during my interviews. Peopledescribed their relationships with other people at Santropol Roulant as feeling unusuallyauthentic. “I feel like myself here,” was one typical way of putting it, or, “People treat melike a whole person.” Interestingly, this was equally true of people who were describingrelationships that weren’t particularly intimate or deep. That is, the feeling of freedomand authenticity had little to do with how well people knew each other or how much theyrevealed about their personal lives in conversation. Authenticity seemed to be a quality ineven the most fleeting, mundane encounters in which almost nothing personal wasrevealed at all. Though I wouldn’t have put it this way back then, I believe I wasencountering something quite close to what we’re calling fullness here in terms of howpeople interacted with each other and with the organization.The second notable structural dynamic at Santropol Roulant was the boundarylessness ofalmost all groupings. While a given functional area or project may have had a core groupof people who generally saw to it, other staff, volunteers, clients, board members, etc.frequently participated (at their own discretion) in such activities. This participation mayhave involved simply wandering through a meeting and making a few comments, or itmay have manifested as a more sustained pattern of coming in and out of area/projectactivities. The organization as a whole was similarly open. Its core activities and clientswere clearly defined, but it constantly made room for people who didn’t fit existingorganizational categories: a person who is anything but homebound wanders in off thestreets and is offered a bite to eat and a place to sit quietly for a while; a volunteer who isnot able to participate in meal preparation or delivery is able to explore other ways ofWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200729belonging; an organization that shares no tactical or strategic goals with SantropolRoulant becomes a kind of organizational companion or friend. Where mostorganizations draw boundaries, Santropol Roulant offered a sustained invitation. Again,in the language of this paper, Santropol Roulant consistently seemed to exhibited anintention toward oneness.Are these, in fact, structural observations I am making? In that they deal with thetranscendence of role and group boundaries, they may seem to have more to do with theabsence of structure than with structure itself. We often associate structure withboundaries. The edges of a form are what seem to give it pattern coherence: the walls in ahouse, the county lines on a map. But there are other ways of thinking about structure,other intentional geometries, in fact, and one of these in particular opens up possibilitiesof organizational engagement that are unavailable in our typical, boundary-drivenorganizational shapes.The Geometry of the CenterCenters Not SidesWilliam Isaacs (1999) writes about Dialogue in the tradition of Martin Buber and DavidBohm. In this tradition, Dialogue is a collective conversational practice intended to helppeople move beyond their current assumptions in order to think together in a trulycollective and creative way. Isaacs calls Dialogue “a conversation with a center but nosides.” He means that Dialogue doesn’t focus on bounding the conversation in order toachieve consensus. Instead, it creates a sense of shared meaning – a center – powerfulenough to hold together any number of apparently diverse perspectives. Part of thispractice is the search for connections between frames and belief systems that seem tocontradict each other on the surface. Much of dialogue takes place in the conversationalsubsoil, the place where roots intertwine and common currents feed even the mostdisparate paradigms. What’s particularly interesting about Dialogue is that it is not just away of making people feel connected. It has a generative power. Powerful newperspectives seem to spring unbidden from the simple act of suspending judgment andlooking for points of contact in ideas that at first feel alien to us. And these perspectivesoften lead to tangible results – fresh ways of expressing ourselves, innovative projects, ornovel modes of organizing.Dialogue is one example of what we might think of as the geometry of the center, ageometry in which things are held together not because they are contained by borders orcategories, but because they are all drawn to the same thing. It is a gravitationalgeometry, a geometry based on attraction.Imagine an organization whose fundamental principle was the center not the side. Whatwould this mean? What would it look like in practice? I’ll offer some possibleperspectives, all of which make sense deductively and all of which can be seenempirically put into practice at a place like Santropol Roulant.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200730Let’s start by defining a “center” as a focal point of interaction. A center is essentially anongoing conversation. The conversation may appear to revolve around a typical functionlike accounting, or around a specific project or initiative. It may, however, be more subtle– grounded in a question that might not seem to have much to do with formalorganizational goals. The “conversation” need not be explicitly articulated. It might betacit and experiential. We don’t need to be talking about cooking or accounting orcommunity-building; we might simply be doing those things together in a sustained way.In fact, the Latin roots of the verb ‘to converse’ mean ‘to live with’ or ‘to dwell among’.The shift of meaning to emphasizing speaking instead of living is relatively recent(Oxford English Dictionary).Gravitational StructureWhat differentiates a centered conversation from a bounded conversation? That is, howdo we know that something like accounting is being structured via attraction rather thanvia typical role and group boundaries? We can deduce two key principles, which, notcoincidentally, also map neatly onto oneness and fullness.A center is infinitely radiant.Each center exhibits field-like properties in that it is understood to affect and be affectedby all bodies, no matter how far they might appear to be from that center. The force of acenter extends endlessly in all directions, which is just another way of saying that, at thelevel of intention, no one is excluded from the conversation. In order to prevent the kindof social identity closure and comparison typically associated with groups, the centercannot fundamentally be understood as a group at all by the people visibly participatingin it. No one is outside of the boundary of the conversation – even people who would notnormally be considered part of the organization – because the conversation has noboundary. No one belongs to the conversation more than anyone else. This property hasnothing to do with visible form. Perhaps only four or five people typically participate inthe planning for a particular project or in a certain organizational function. But at thelevel of intention, each participant in the conversation understands that it affectseveryone, even if only diffusely, and that everyone is a latent or potential participant.One day someone who has never indicated an interest in the project might ask a question,or offer an idea, or sit in on a meeting, or join an activity. Recognizing such latentparticipation is the intentional stance that allows a group to escape the social identity trapand to stay attuned to the underlying hum of interconnectedness or oneness that I haveargued is an essential dimension of human engagement.A center is perfectly gradient.There are an infinite number of relative locations one can occupy with respect to a center.Again, the field-like metaphor fits nicely here. There are no discrete categories ofparticipation in a field, no separate degrees of in or out. In organizations, this means thata person may locate herself at any “distance” from a conversational center. That is, shemay invest as much or as little energy and attention in the thing as she sees fit. The moreshe invests, the “closer” she is to the center. This is a difficult structure to envision. EvenWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200731if we want a particular project or function to be open to everyone, we generally predefinecategories of participation. “You’re welcome to be a part of this initiative, but youmust come to meetings twice a week, or agree to give a certain number of hours,” etc.Perhaps, if we are sophisticated, we offer several options for participation. But this is afar cry from the idea that a person may contribute in the manner she wants to and to thedegree she sees fit. Such freedom is precisely what true fullness requires: organizationalconversations that allow us to invoke the various parts of ourselves if, when, and how weare moved to. Fullness does not imply that we are using all dimensions of ourselves inevery context; it merely implies that we have access to those dimensions, that we are notcut off from them.Let’s call the principles of radiance and gradience gravitational principles. Gravity isradiant in that it excludes nothing. We live in a universe in which everything is attractedto everything. It is neither exaggerated nor in the least romantic to say that I have arelationship with even the most distant star. It is a scientific fact. And gravity is gradient.The degree of attraction one body has on another is inversely proportional to distance.Gravity is always at work, but the closer we are to something the more we feel it.If these gravitational principles were fully imbued in an organization, conversationalcenters would become energy centers. The work being done around a given focus wouldcreate energy for the organization and nourish its participants. Why? Becauseconversational centers would be sustained as people were attracted to them. If theconversation were not feeding something important, people would simply move awayfrom it. (I address the question of what would happen if no one wanted to be involved ina seemingly indispensable function below.) Much organizational interaction works in theopposite way; it drains those involved of their engagement and enthusiasm, leaving themtired and in need of re-charging from some other source. We can think about an energycenter as essentially a vital and ongoing conversation, a place of mingled curiosities andinterests, a place where self-expression turns into relationship. It might take time for theorganization to develop the level of transparency necessary for people to be able to seewhat they are drawn toward. And it might take time for individuals to learn how to actgravitationally. We carry so many preexisting frames with us into our organizational livesthat it might be difficult to move away from thinking about what we are supposed to doin order to think about what we want to do, what we feel called to do. But let’s assumefor the moment that this habit can be cultivated, personally and organizationally.One consequence of a gravitational approach would be that strategy and growth would bebased on engagement rather than on opportunity assessment. The organization wouldgrow where there was energy for growth, seeking to discover and nurture new energycenters. This would call for an intuitive rather than an analytical approach todevelopment. What might make sense from a traditional strategic perspective might makeno sense at all in terms of engagement. We might see the need for a new project or newstrategic direction, but if there were no intrinsic human energy to support the project,either it would fail or it would succeed at the cost of engagement. A gravitationalorganization would need to learn how to pay attention to and develop the conversationalcenters that harbored enough latent energy to grow.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200732Comments on Network StructuresGiven the relational freedom and the centered geometry of a gravitational structure, onemight sensibly ask if what I am describing is simply a type of network organization. Thestudy of social networks within and among organizations presents structure not as apattern of formal or informal roles and groups but as a pattern of interlaced relationshipsamong actors (Tichy 1981). Networks may have their hubs (centers) and can be partiallyor completely open. Are they then “unbound”? Are networks essentially engaging? Ithink not. A full discussion of network theory in organization studies would requireanother paper, but I’ll make a few brief comments on why networks, as they have cometo be understood, exert constraints similar to those found in classical, formalizedstructures, and why gravitational structures are of a different order altogether.Gravitational structures are field organized, networks are path organized. That is,gravitational structures assume at least a latent relationship between each element.Networks do involve direct relationships, but most relationships are indirect, mediated byother elements. To reach another element, one element may have to connect along a paththrough several other elements. This means that elements are defined/identified in thenetwork in terms of their position, or in other words, their role. The role here is definedby the various capacities the actor has via her position in the network with respect tothings like influence, resource flow, and communication (Powell and Smith-Doerr 1994).Power and status are gained by occupying privileged locations that either serve as hubsby connecting to a large number of other nodes or have singular access to certain spacesby bridging “structural holes” (Burt 1992; Powell and Smith-Doerr 1994; Burke 1997).As with any positional structure, identity plays a key part in defining/constrainingindividual behavior and relationship possibilities. In short, networks are role structures.Networks are also group structures. Although networks may be entirely openconceptually, group boundaries play a central part in determining network structures inpractice. The group is one of the chief concepts studied by network theorists (Parkhe,Wasserman et al. 2006). Group phenomena like density, clustering, membership criteria,and openness are important aspects of network structure (Tichy 1981).Another important distinction between social networks and gravitational organization isthat in social networks people are the nodes or centers and relationships connect oneperson to another, whereas in gravitational organizations relationships (or what we’vecalled conversations) are the centers and people essentially connect one relationship toanother. It is as if the dots and the lines in the schematic diagrams have been reversed.The distinction is not semantic. Social structures that are anchored by individuals willtend to be static since they rely for structure on social position, meaning that people willbe defined through their social and role identities. The social network, in fact, is apowerful mode of developing us/them distinctions as, for example, in social movements(Lamont and Molnar 2002). Most network scholars have adopted a substantialistunderstanding of network dynamics (anchored in the elements of the network) rather thana relational understanding, though there are exceptions (Emirbayer 1997).Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200733Overall, network roles and groups do not tend to be particularly fluid. They showconsiderable inertia (Kim, Oh et al. 2006; Parkhe, Wasserman et al. 2006), suggestingthat networks are, to a large degree, boundary-defined structures. In terms of identityeffects they may differ little from hierarchical structures. In fact there is a debate in theliterature as to whether a network is actually a unique class of social structure at all orwhether it is simply a hybrid of market and hierarchical structures (Borgatti and Foster2003).Gravitational Structure in PracticeAll of this sounds painfully abstract, no doubt, and it makes the gravitational ideal typeappear farfetched. Whether we are in hierarchical or network organizations, our verysense of who we are in the world seems to have been constructed by hemming ourselvesin in terms of the various roles we occupy and the affinity groups we belong to. Is it thenreally possible to work together in the un-bound manner I have described? Bluntly, Ithink the answer is yes – maybe not perfectly, maybe not without failure at times, but inessence, yes. At Santropol Roulant, as I said, the two dynamics that seem to shape theorganization at a fundamental level are the focus on people as whole humans beings, notroles or parts, and the generally invitational nature that seems to infuse groups there, fromthe smallest working group to the organization as a whole. These dynamics translatestructurally into something very like radiance and gradience.The place is not utopian. It has its stresses and failures. Nor is it completely role-less andgroup-less. It is simply that roles and groups don’t have the organizing, binding force thatthey do in most organizations. They seem merely to be temporary conveniences and arerarely confused with the more fundamentally open, relational energy that gives theorganization its deepest coherence. People wander into the organization and through eachother’s workdays in unpredictable ways. Sometimes these encounters are small andincidental. Perhaps the graphic designer walks through the kitchen and stops to chat withsomeone peeling vegetables. Perhaps a volunteer overhears a fundraising conversationand sits down to take it in and even contribute ideas. Sometimes, however, the unlikelyencounters generated at Santropol Roulant result in major new projects or evenorganizational realignments of various kinds. People don’t necessarily identify stronglywith their particular functions. They frequently get involved in other parts of theorganization, and indeed, often change roles entirely. It is not uncommon for a staffmember to shift roles two or three times before leaving (and this is within an organizationwith a staff of only a dozen). And volunteers shift their “roles” even more frequently.In terms of group identities, the same kind of openness prevails. Group relationships arestrong, but ever-changing since they are not closed or cliquish. People participate ingroups, but they don’t identify with them, since they are so permeable. Overallidentification with the organization as a whole also appears to be quite low. People don’tthink about themselves as “Santropol Roulanters” (or in any similar way). Turnover isquite high, suggesting that people don’t anchor their fundamental sense of who they arein their belonging to this particular organization. They will describe the organization inWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200734general terms as a wonderful and special place, but they almost never talk about thepeople there in terms of homogeneity. You would be hard pressed to get someone there togive you a description of a typical member of the organization in anything but the mostgeneral terms (e.g., “caring”). And though there is clearly the sense that the organizationis different from other organizations, most people are extremely reluctant to say anythingnegative about people in other organizations. I won’t go so far as to claim that no SocialIdentity effects occur there. But again, they do not seem to dominate in any meaningfulway.One objection to this gravitational approach to structure might be that even if it works, itmight only be appropriate for certain types of organizations – perhaps small organizationsor nonprofits, etc. Organizations like Semco (Semler 1989; 2003) in Brazil, however,suggest otherwise. With several thousand employees and sales on the order of $200million, Semco too pursues work with an unusual lack of boundaries and is renowned forbeing a highly engaging place. Working hours are completely self-determined (orcooperatively determined when necessary). Salaries can be self-set. People are givenample room to develop aspects of themselves not directly related to the company. Thereis little emphasis on formal definitions of roles or policies. And while perhaps groups arenot as open as they are at Santropol Roulant, the organization is unusually transparent,with open meetings, rotating CEOs, and the frequent habit of aligning itself with unusualorganizational partners.W. L. Gore, a $2 billion fluouropolymer manufacturer, has structured itself almostentirely without roles (Shipper and Manz 1992). Each person there is an “associate” andmay at times serve as a “sponsor,” helping guide or orient associates. A sponsor is not apermanent state but a role any associate may adopt at a given time. Work is largely selfdetermined, based on four simple principles:1. Try to be fair.2. Use your freedom to grow.3. Make your own commitments and keep them.4. Consult with other associates prior to any action that may adversely affect thereputation or financial stability of the company.The commitment to the freedom implied in these principles is not superficial. Oneemployee described the difficulty she had in figuring out exactly what to do.I was waiting for a memo or something, or a job description. Finally after anothermonth I was so frustrated, I felt what have I gotten myself into? I went to mysponsor and said, “What the heck do you want from me? I need something fromyou.” And he said, “If you don’t know what you’re supposed to do, examine yourcommitments and opportunities.” (Shipper and Manz 1992: 57)Again, this is not an empirical paper, so I won’t go into these organizations in detail. Butit is important not to dismiss the themes I’ve outlined as applicable only in very limitedcontexts. If, in fact, these are the themes at the root of human engagement, then theyWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200735should be true, in some fashion or other, for any organization that genuinely seeks tofoster such engagement.Another objection to the geometry of the center might be that, because of its lack ofclosure and its emphasis on self-expression, a gravitational structure will produce at bestan inefficient, poorly coordinated muddle. The experiences of organizations likeSantropol Roulant and Semco say otherwise. In terms of coordination, the thing to keepin mind is that a gravitational structure (in fact any kind of social or organizationalstructure) is rooted primarily in relationships. Self-expression occurs through theserelationships, not apart from them. The practical effect of this dynamic is that people dealwith coordination issues in very commonsensical ways. At Semco, as I said, people arefree to make their own schedules. This freedom is not just glorified flex-time. If someonewants to work at 3:00 AM, or take a particular Thursday (or every Thursday) off, she iswelcome to do so. However, people are also responsible for the success and coordinationof their own projects, and this invariably means adjusting to other people’s schedules, notin a prescribed bureaucratic way, but in a mutual, contextual way (again, think ofMintzberg’s “mutual adjustment” mechanism). Things work similarly at SantropolRoulant. People move about freely, but check in with each other regularly.When thinking about functional coordination, the question of onerous tasks also arises. Ifpeople are free to define the level and nature of their participation in variousconversations (and associated activities), who will take out the trash? As people findthemselves deeply engaged with each other and with the organization as a whole, theyseem to figure this out for themselves. The trash gets taken out. In fact sometimes it isquite pleasant to take out the trash (when no one is forcing you to) after you have beenstaring at a computer screen all day. Once I observed Daniel, Santropol Roulant’stranslator-in-residence, walk away from his computer, pick up a broom, and spend thenext 20 minutes sweeping. There was no schedule for this. It was not simply his turn insome kind of rotation. He just decided to do it. He looked very peaceful with that broom.Whether he swept because he was bothered by the dirt or because he wanted to dosomething physical for a while, who can say? Either way, the floor got cleaned.A deeper objection to what I have proposed might be that focusing to such a high degreeon self-expression and self-exploration might lead to a narcissistic and ultimatelystagnant culture. Is a gravitational approach so focused on process that nothing ends upgetting done? Is it so inward looking that it impedes innovation? There are two things tokeep in mind with respect to this issue. First, as I have described it (and as I have seen it),a gravitational approach is not, in fact, particularly process-focused if by process-focusedwe mean spending a great deal of time trying to explore and articulate relationalprocesses outside of particular contexts. Building relationships among “whole persons”does not necessarily mean talking about “whole persons.” Nor does it mean talking about“relationships” in the abstract. It does mean paying close attention to the relationshipsthat are at work in any given context. But such attention is often tacit and it actually leadsto a contextual awareness that facilitates energetic and efficient “doing.” Secondly,narcissism entails an obsessive focus on the self (particularly self-image). Soorganizational narcissism would entail an obsessive focus on the organizational self. ButWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200736a gravitational organization has no self in the sense of a fixed organizational identity. If itis impossible to say who is inside of the organization and who is outside of it, and ifrelationships and activity patterns shift according to the specific people who are involvedin them, then the organization will not be locked into specific identity boundaries, and itcan consequently become extremely fertile ground for innovation.The experiences of organizations like Santropol Roulant and Semco suggest that it ispossible to organize via emergent relational centers rather than via role and groupidentities. Identity processes don’t disappear, of course, but they cease to be the centralorganizing force. What is at work here is a different kind of structuring, one that turns outto be both radically engaging and profoundly creative.Introducing Implicate StructureNow that I’ve exhausted dozens of pages (and likely the reader) in order to introduce analternative structural geometry, I will risk the reader’s resentment by making the claimthat in terms of radical engagement, structure, as we normally understand the term,doesn’t really matter. What follows might seem like a long and abstract digression, but Ibelieve that for anyone who truly wants to put some of these ideas into practice, it is themost important section of this paper.Typically, scholars who study social structures focus on discernable patterns in socialforms. By ‘forms’ I mean things that are external to personal, qualitative experience. Asmentioned above, the forms of social structure most frequently studied include tasksegmentation, group segmentation, decision-making authority, information flow,behavioral routines, and cultural symbols. These forms certainly have an effect on ourqualitative experience of life, but they themselves are not that experience. This is easy tosee when we consider that the same form might have quite a different effect on us atdifferent times. One day the fact that our boss is responsible for strategic decisions mightreassure us and make us feel safe, the next day it might make us feel irritated andconstrained. At a given time in our life, we might cherish certain social routines orcustoms (e.g., going to church or wearing a tie), and at another time those same routinesand customs might leave us feeling robotic and inauthentic.It is natural for us to associate structure with form rather than qualitative experience. Wedon’t normally think of our qualitative experiences as structural at all. We think of formin terms of how things look to us, and our experience in terms of how things feel. Butinsofar as qualitative experiences can be cast into patterns, they do indeed have astructural quality. This type of structure is more easily grasped if we consider thefollowing question: What is the structure of a loving relationship?Try to describe a loving relationship in form. Try to tell someone what it looks like. It isimpossible to do. The forms that a loving relationship might take are infinite. It might beloud, it might be quiet. It might be funny, it might be serious. The people involved mightlive together or apart. We may feel safe in generally excluding certain kinds of visiblebehaviors; we might reject the idea that inflicting physical pain on someone could beWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200737loving (although, if you re-set my dislocated shoulder, I might consider this both a lovingand an extremely painful act). But few of us would presume to prescribe what a lovingrelationship must look like on the surface. Should we do so, we are likely to find acounterexample to our prescription soon enough. A loving relationship is primarily amatter of stance. We experience love and then we create forms of interaction to expressthat love in any given moment or context.Despite its essentially formless nature, however, a loving relationship is structural. Thereis an underlying rule, a kind of intention that leads to a relatively stable pattern over time.The pattern here is one of qualitative experience, but it is a pattern nonetheless. We canexperience love consistently and come to rely on it. It may be hard to say exactly what isconsistent here. The pattern we are relying on is not a pattern of form. It is not even apattern of surface emotions, as our feelings of happiness, sadness, attraction, enthusiasm,worry, etc. are likely to vary substantially over the course of a loving relationship.Nevertheless, we can recognize that the relationship has a persistent fundamental quality.It has a pattern. I’ll borrow a concept from physicist David Bohm (1980) and call thistype of qualitative pattern implicate structure, contrasting it with the explicate structure ofa pattern rooted in form.3 The following definitions summarize the explicate/implicatedistinction as I’ve adapted it for the purposes of this discussion:Explicate Structure – Persistent patterns of relationship as they manifest in form.One important feature of forms is that they can be abstracted from individualexperience, and it is precisely this abstraction that we usually associate withstructure. Such abstraction is easy to see in the case of decision-making roles, forexample (managers, vice presidents, etc.). But even more interpretive structuralfeatures like norms are essentially abstractions. The cultural belief in the moralvalue of hard work, say, might involve both subjective feelings and subjectiveinterpretations (with considerable latitude). Nonetheless, its structural import isthat it is not defined by the individual experience of hard work, but by a collectivestance toward the idea of hard work. We are not as interested in what hard workfeels like to someone working as we are in what it means. Note that explicateforms are not necessarily “formal” or explicit. They do not have to be encoded inwords or policies. Suppose I always defer to you in terms of major decisions. Thisrelationship dynamic might be entirely informal, even unacknowledged. Butagain, the repetition here – the pattern – is of an outward, behavioral feature. Thepattern is in my deference to you, not in how I experience that deference. In factmy actual, qualitative experience of this deference might be wildly unstructured,3 Bohm develops his notions of explicate and implicate order from some of the fundamental principles ofquantum physics. Explicate order is the discrete order of the perceivable universe in which objects aredifferentiated. Implicate order is an underlying, undifferentiated “enfolded” order that is essentially unitary.Explicate forms rise out of implicate wholeness in much the way that waves rise of out of a body of water.“Wholeness is what is real, and . . . fragmentation is the response of this whole to man’s action, guided byillusory perception, which shaped by fragmentary thought . . . All our different ways of thinking are to beconsidered as different ways of looking at the one reality, each with some domain in which it is clear andadequate” (7-8).Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200738un-patterned. I might experience it as reassuring guidance one minute andservitude the next.Implicate Structure – Persistent patterns of relationship as they are experienced.The quality of the relationship is the focus here, and that can only be definedinternally by the way that the people in the relationship experience it. Theexperiences in question should not be confused with superficial emotionalpatterns. Implicate structure is rooted in deeper, intuitive states such as love,creativity, engagement, etc. I’ll define ‘state’ here as an experiential, intuitedpattern of feeling that is not dependent on forms or emotions. When we say welove someone, we are naming a pattern or consistency in our stance toward thatperson. As discussed, this stance is not grounded in the varying forms that therelationship will take over time. But neither is it really grounded in emotion, sincewhile I may always perceive myself as loving my wife, I certainly do not feel thesame emotions toward her from one minute to the next. I might be happy, sad,enthusiastic, irritated, etc., and yet I still recognize an underlying, deepconsistency in the way I experience my relationship with her. (One could say thesame thing about a feeling of sustained relational creativity or engagement.) Sincea social structure involves widely shared relationship patterns that persist acrosstime and space, relational states become structural when they exhibit aconsistency (always imperfect) from person to person and when they can becommunicated or transmitted across time and space boundaries. Why do I say thatemotional patterns are not part of implicate structure? We can certainly talk aboutshared emotional patterns that are structural. For example, fans of a sports teamshare predictable highs (wins) and lows (defeats). But the reason that theseemotions are shared and structural is that they are provoked by very specificforms - team names, uniforms, an ideology (a set of words and beliefs) aroundwinning and losing, very rigid sets of rules and policies (game rules, leaguestructures), etc. There are, of course, more pernicious forms of emotionalstructuring, such as fascism, xenophobia, racial supremacy movements, etc. Butthe point is that emotion can only be structured in the social sense via aninteraction with very rigid forms. In other words, emotional structure is a part ofexplicate structure. Implicate structure, as I am defining it here, is formindependent.It uses forms to express itself, but the intuitive state gives rise to theforms, not the reverse.The connection between implicate structure and engagement is obvious. If we areinterested in engaging organizations then we must think in terms of implicate structure.Engagement is an experiential state of feeling connected and present; it may exist inmany forms and may be accompanied by many emotions. While some visible forms may,over time, seem to be more frequently found in engaging organizations, enoughcounterexamples can always be found that the experience of engagement is notessentially locked in those forms. This is not a comforting truth. It is easy to changeorganizational forms. It is easy to make them consistent. But it is far from easy to changeimplicate patterns, or even to know what they are or how one might access them.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200739We can start by understanding that, insofar as it results in engagement, gravitationalstructure is implicate. It is a matter of intention not form. A gravitational organization hastwo fundamental intentions:• That people have room to express themselves fully and interact as whole persons.• That no one be excluded by definition from any conversational center (function,project, inquiry, etc.) that has arisen.It is just as impossible to prescribe the specific form that these intentions will take as it isto prescribe the form of a loving relationship. (And for a very good reason, since in theend loving relationships – with the self and with others – are exactly what we are talkingabout here.) It is quite possible for an organization to look gravitational at the explicatelevel but be rigidly role-bound and group-bound at the experiential level. We may abolishroles, set up open committees, allow people to work on whatever they want to wheneverthey want to, etc. But if our moment-to-moment intentions toward each other do notmatch these forms, our experience of the organization will not be engaging. If I see youprimarily as an accountant and relate to you as such, it doesn’t matter whether or not youhave the title or the job description. If I resent the fact that the building porter is askingquestions about sales, it doesn’t matter that all of our sales meetings are technically“open.” It is also possible, if rare, for the organization to look very boundary-structuredon the surface but to be essentially gravitational at the implicate level. We may havemany roles and rules, but if we do not interact with each other primarily via those rolesand rules, our experiences of our work may well be deeply engaging. We can surmisethat over time, explicate structure is likely to mimic implicate structure, but that doesn’tmean we can create an implicate structure by starting with an explicate shift any morethan we make ourselves fall in love by buying someone boxes of candy and greetingcards.The stability, the coherence, of a radically engaging organization must arise from itsstability of intention. This doesn’t mean that there will be no stability of form. Forexample, Santropol Roulant, throughout most of its history, has cooked and deliveredmeals six days a week according to a very rigorous schedule. A morning shift beginspreparing the meals at 9:30 AM. An afternoon shift finishes and packs the meals at 1:00PM. And people are off on their delivery routes at 3:00 PM. But there is a clear sense inthe organization that these shifts and this schedule are arising out of the overall intentionof connection and engagement. Insofar as the schedule and approach continue to nourishthat sense of engagement – among staff, volunteers, and clients – it makes no sense toalter it. Deciding that out of some misplaced commitment to formlessness the scheduleshould be altered every day would be just as absurd as an overreaching commitment tokeeping the schedule the way it is whatever happens.Forms can often be quite subtle. For example, in an effort to avoid organizational patternsof domination, some feminist organizations adopted what they called a ‘structureless’approach in which roles might temporarily be assigned by lots or rotated regularly toinclude everyone. Initially engaging, these approaches led to fragmentation and energydissipation over time (Calas and Smircich 1996). Such a focus on form – even a flexible,rotating form – is counter to the principle of gravitational alignment, a principle thatWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200740allows each person to locate herself in the organizational universe wherever seems mostappropriate to her at any given time. If this principle leads to someone’s occupying thesame apparent, formal position for 20 years, so be it. The key difference between animplicate, gravitational structure and an explicate “structureless” structure, is that thegravitational organization does not force form to shift. Instead, it is constantly attuned tothe possibility that form will need to shift if energy changes.In fact, that’s exactly what happened at Santropol Roulant recently. The organization hasbeen increasingly taken up with the question of dissemination: how it might share itsexperience and wisdom with other organizations. This was not a particular concern in theearly years, but as the organization matures, it is being asked more frequently to helpwith other kinds of projects, movements, and organizations. As people at SantropolRoulant became more comfortable with the idea of sharing their work with the outsideworld, they also began to feel the need for more time to reflect together about themeaning of their work and how best they might share it. They realized that the rigorousschedule, previously a source of energy, was now impeding their ability to connect witheach other and with their own ideas. So simply, but dramatically, they changed theschedule, moving from six days of delivery to five, with double meals being delivered onWednesday. (This was not done without a great deal of conversation with clients, ofcourse). This freed up Thursdays from any cooking or delivery needs, and now eachThursday is devoted to a mixture of shared reflection around various themes andindividual time in which people can pursue whatever projects they need space for. Feworganizations would have the courage to simply shut down operations for an entire day aweek. But for Santropol Roulant, even drastic formal changes like this can be broachedwhen it becomes clear that people need a different kind of form in which to express theirenergies and connections to each other.In summary, a spiritual architecture is an implicate architecture. Explicate forms mayserve as reminders, clues, enablers, etc. (for example, egalitarian organizational structurescan mitigate some of the inter-group comparison dynamic associated with Social IdentityTheory (Joshi 2006)), but the moment we come to rely on them, we are likely to lose ourway. Implicate structures based on gravitational intentions can offer the kind ofboundarylessness necessary for engagement while still creating organizational forms inwhich we can work together in specific, personal, context-appropriate ways. On the onehand, a gravitational organization will look as if it is composed of many differentrelationship configurations, each with its own focal point or energy center. On the otherhand, since each configuration is unbound and all-inclusive at the level of intention, theorganization can be seen as a unified relational field. Each energy center then is not aseparate thing, but simply a perspective, a vantage point from which to see andexperience that field. And insofar as the energy centers extend infinitely beyond what wewould normally understand as the organization’s own boundaries, the organization itselfcan be seen as simply another perspective or vantage point on a much larger, allinclusive,universal relational field. Heady and even mystical in theory, but fairly simplein practice. Rooted in the smallest moments of personal expression and relationalconnection, a gravitational structure grows naturally out of the interaction betweenpassion and compassion.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200741III. Meaning UnboundOrganizational PurposeLet us briefly return to Mitroff’s study of executive attitudes toward spirituality. We’vetalked about two kinds of connection highlighted in that study: connection to the self(fullness) and connection to everyone else (oneness). But there is a third sort ofconnection almost universally seen by Mitroff’s interviewees as spiritually important:connection to a larger sense of purpose or meaning. To invoke the spiritual dimension oflife is to pursue the ‘why’. This pursuit need not be closed, or even explicit. In fact,Mitroff’s participants described their own sense of purpose in very general, diffuse ways.They seemed to be more interested in purpose as an intuitive feeling or experience thanas an abstract, articulated idea. Nevertheless, from Mitroff’s perspective, one can’tengage with the spiritual without engaging with purpose, or again, as Tillich puts it, with“what matters most.”‘Purpose’ is also a foundational element of most definitions of organization.Organizations are role systems, but what differentiates organizations from other kinds ofrole systems like families, tribes, or communities, is that organizations have a particularpurpose. They exist in order to do something. Many, probably most, organizations treatthis sense of purpose as synonymous with whatever the organization produces: “Ourpurpose is to make ball bearings.” Purpose here is functional, with no particularconnection to deeper, more foundational values. To the degree that the organizationidentifies with and instrumentalizes people toward this limited “purpose” to the exclusionof any broader sense of meaning, it will be only superficially engaging at best, ifMitroff’s respondents are correct.Other organizations, however, do understand themselves as participating in broader fieldsof meaning creation. Social sector organizations, of course, generally see themselves astrying to express particular values in the world. But businesses can also see themselves aschange agents for particular values. These values might be focused on the people withinthe business: “Let’s create a work environment where people can learn and grow andenjoy themselves.” If these internal values are not merely instrumental, designed toincrease profits, but also seen as good in and of themselves, then that business is at leastprovisionally concerning itself with meaning. Similarly, the values of the business mightbe externally focused – framed in terms of society at large: “Let’s create a world in whicheveryone can communicate with everyone via low-cost, accessible technology.” If thatstance is simply part of a marketing strategy, it is not values-based, but insofar as it isseen by organization members as meaningful in and of itself (i.e., “We believe this wouldbe a good thing to do, even if our organization didn’t exist.”), it can be said to be valuesbased.Government agencies too, qua organizations, can often see themselves as meaningagents and not just instrumental deliverers of administrative services. So although theorganizations that most explicitly wrestle with meaning are generally found in the socialsector, any type of organization can be meaning-driven, at least theoretically. For theWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200742purposes of the following discussion, we’ll classify any such meaning-drivenorganization as a ‘social change organization’.If we continue to define “spirit” in the broadest possible way, then it is fair to say thatsocial change organizations are all working, in one way or another, to create a morespiritual world, a world that aligns more closely with the human spirit. Social changeorganizations, whether they know it or not, seek radical engagement at the societal level.However, the way they typically understand themselves to be fostering their specificmissions often directly contradicts the principles of fullness and oneness. If thoseprinciples are correct, then most social change efforts are ultimately incoherent.Overcoming this incoherence requires both a different way of thinking about purpose anda different way of understanding the organization’s role in pursuit of that purpose.Disengagement as IncoherenceEarly in my community development career, I went to work for a nonprofit organizationin Baltimore called South East Community Organization (SECO). SECO was a typicalfull-service community development corporation with a 20-year track record of success.It offered services like literacy training and employment counseling, managed real estateand economic development projects, and served as a general advocacy and organizingcatalyst for its 80,000-person catchment area in southeast Baltimore. By most measures,it was a relatively healthy organization with political legitimacy and a stable budget, andI wouldn’t describe my experience there as negative exactly. At the same, somethingnever felt quite right to me. I was treated well. I was doing ostensibly meaningful workwith people I liked. But the organization felt somewhat lifeless and mechanical, and I wasnever sure that our interactions with the community were making a great deal ofdifference.If you had to describe SECO’s mission generically it would be something like this:• To make the community and political life of the area more democratic andparticipatory;• To enable residents to develop themselves in meaningful, multi-dimensional waysthrough education, economic progress, and cultural activities;• To create vital public spaces and events that would connect residents to each othermore deeply and catalyze work, play, and celebration.Most community development organizations have missions quite similar to SECO’s.In retrospect, one of the things that strikes me is how little aligned my experience insideof the organization was with the organization’s external mission. While SECO had acollegial culture, I wouldn’t describe it as democratic or participatory. The chain ofcommand from the board to the executive director to the program directors to programstaff to support staff was clear and traditional. Nor did the organization treat any of itsmembers in a notably multi-dimensional way. We were acknowledged to be humanbeings, but not much energy was put into enriching our lives in ways that did not directlyaffect our work. And finally, we spent very little time connecting to each other let aloneWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200743celebrating such connections. An annual picnic and the occasional party were the extentof internal “vital public spaces and events.”The approach the organization took to its staff – in other words, the approach we took toeach other – was primarily instrumental. We were there not to live and experience theorganization’s values but to serve them. There was no person or group to blame for thisstate of affairs. The board and the executive director experienced the same dynamics aseveryone else. They too were instruments. The organization itself was an instrument. Thequestion of how one could be expected to facilitate democracy or build community whenone’s daily relationships with other people contained little of either was simply not asked.Nor is it asked by most social change organizations. The giving arrow tends to fly in onlyone direction, and we accept this, because the work seems so important, so noble. Whenyou are trying to lift people from poverty or give voice to the voiceless, what can yourown seemingly smaller problems and yearnings matter? The fact that this attitude mightmake us relationally incapable of putting the organization’s values into practice is seldomconsidered. In fact, such instrumentalism is the hallmark of modern social movementsand their children, social change organizations.Instrumentalism and Social MovementsThe modern social movement first took root in the 18th century. As a form of intentionalsocial and political change, it differed in several ways from the military, religious, andaristocratic change patterns the world had come to know. In particular, scholars focus onthe fact that social movements involved collective contentious action that drew on amodular and portable repertoire of tools such as the barricade, the petition, the strike, thesymbolic protest (e.g., effigy burning), and the street march (Tarrow 1994; Tilly 2004).Previously, social change techniques had been associated with particular groups orparticular locations. They were unique or at least highly customized. With thedevelopment of new communication channels, change techniques spread, becoming moregeneric and abstract.Two features of the movement-based approach to social change bear on our discussion.First, as Tarrow (1994) points out, movement tools in the repertoire were only effective ifboth sides understood their meanings and were able to respond to each other accordingly.The repertoire is at once a structural and a cultural concept. Tilly’s “wellestablishedactions” are not only what people do when they are engaged inconflict with others; it is what they know how to do and what others expect themto do. Had sit-ins been used by challengers in eighteenth-century France, theirtargets would not have known how to respond to them . . . (31)In this light we can understand social movements as largely role-playing ventures,drawing on stylized, symbolic, “appropriate” groupings of activities that are understoodboth by those performing them and by those playing complementary roles (e.g., “unions”and “bosses”). Secondly, the tool repertoire grew to include organizational forms, not justspecific protest tactics (Clemens 1996). Modes of organizing became abstract, portable,Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200744and modular as well, evolving away from organic practices rooted in local cultures. Theprofessionalization of social protest was one result (McAdam, McCarthy et al. 1996).From their early evolution, social movements have been largely instrumental, drawing onpeople and resources to carry out abstracted roles and activities in pursuit of themovement’s ultimate change goals.One can see this instrumentalism permeating the theoretical frames of the broader, moreambitious social change thinkers and activists of the mid-nineteenth through earlytwentieth century. Tarrow (1994), for example, traces out three lines of related framing.1. Marx, who saw social change as essentially driven by the inherent fault lines in agiven social structure. Structural contradictions lead people to act out theinevitable social collapse and reorganization. From this point of view, people arethe instruments of social-structural forces.2. Lenin, who believed that structural reorganization needed to be catalyzed by avanguard of leaders. Here, leaders can be seen as instrumental with respect tolarger change forces and goals, and the average movement participant isinstrumental with respect to the leaders’ interpretations of those forces and goals.3. Gramsci, who argued that structure and leadership wouldn’t provoke real changeunless that change were grounded in culture. Culture was what ultimately movedpeople to act. Culture itself – the patterns of interaction and meaning that give uscommon ground – becomes instrumental from this perspective.Returning now to the problem of incoherence, insofar as modern social changeorganizations have grown out of instrumental, contentious social movements, it is notsurprising that the organization and the people involved in it are only considered in termsof their instrumental utility. Nor is it surprising that this approach tends to confound ourchange efforts. At best, we have social change organizations that feel mechanical andlifeless and have a difficult time sparking meaningful relationship shifts in theircommunities. At worst we have revolutions that preach equality and brotherhood as theysend their opponents and eventually their own members to prison camps or the guillotine.The answer to this dilemma may seem obvious: simply align the internal workings ofyour movement or organization more closely with your stated values. We can think ofsuch alignment as organizational integrity. But integrity and coherence are not quite thesame thing. Organizational integrity, when defined this way, is largely a matter of form:if you promote democracy, make your organization structurally democratic.Organizational coherence is a matter not of form but of intention or spirit: if you promotedemocracy work to make even the slightest relationships you are in feel democratic. Wedo have some examples of coherent social movements. Gandhi and Martin Luther King,Jr. spring to mind. In fact, Gandhi’s famous dictum is a personal version of social changecoherence: “Be the change you want to see in the world.” But I believe that suchcoherence is much harder than it sounds, because incoherence between organizationalvalues and practices is merely a reflection of a deeper incoherence between the waypurposes are framed and the general human yearning for fullness and oneness. Tounderstand what coherence really involves, we have to explore more fully the manner inWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200745which social change movements and organizations typically understand their missionsand the contradictions with radical engagement that arise from those understandings.Meaning and Function: The Problem of FullnessA person is hungry. In a world trying its best to be compassionate, an organizationsprings up to feed that person. It is a noble purpose, and people cast themselves gladlyinto its pursuit. An organization as a purpose machine has a relentless ability to focus ona particular need. And it can achieve a great efficiency in meeting that need, particularlyin a competitive environment, whether the competition be around sales or grants. But thisfocus and efficiency can have a peculiar effect on the people involved. The organizationdesigned to feed people presumably wants to feed them in order that they be able to livefull and meaningful lives. Feeding people is never, philosophically speaking, the ultimateconcern. It is not rooted simply in biological necessity but in the (perhaps tacit) belief thatindividual life has dignity and meaning, and the ability of people to experience thatdignity and pursue that meaning should not be restricted by things like malnutrition.But when does the “person who is being fed” become the “Hungry Person”? When does afunction create a role? Perhaps the role is not as explicit as “accountant” – call it ashadow role – but there is a very real sense in which the organization’s increasing focuson the problem of hunger creates people who are seen as, and may end up seeingthemselves as, primarily “Hungry People” – not just people who happen to be hungry.The explicit values of the organization, of course, are likely to affirm each person’swholeness and importance. But this affirmation may mean little, when almost all of theorganization’s day-to-day energies, expressed in numberless encounters, transactions,policies, programs, rules, rituals, stories, and documents, are mediated by the centralpurpose or “need” that give rise to the organization in the first place. Organizations aresingle-minded. Consequently their relational vocabularies – the words, concepts, andoverall frames through which they develop relationships – are almost always stunted,diminished. In an organization, we relate to each other through that one thing that givesthe organization its apparent purpose, whether that purpose involves microchips orhunger. Everyone (every role) is instrumental to the organization’s purpose, even(perhaps especially) the customer or client who is being served. It doesn’t matter whichside of the transaction we are on, in the end. We might be “Feeder” instead of the“Hungry Person.” We are all defining ourselves and each other in terms of the parts weplay in the particularly narrow set of meanings through which the organization is framingthe world.When we are caught up organizational life, this narrowness seems like a sensibleapproach. We confront great challenges. We are pressed for time. We need to get thingsdone. If a woman is starving to death, it seems to matter little that when she is notstarving she likes to paint or that the man feeding her has a difficult relationship with hisbrother. It is particularly easy to ignore these things, to instrumentalize both peopleinvolved, when the organizational purpose is a noble one. Why shouldn’t we become“instruments” for great things – feeding, teaching, discovering, healing? If the firstpostulate of radical engagement holds, however – if we feel dispirited when we are cutWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200746off from our own fullness – then it holds for any sort of narrowing, noble or mundane.And there are voices in the social sector who tell us just that. John McKnight (1995) isone of the most powerful. He argues that we need to move from the “servant” ideal thatdrives professionalized social services to the “friend” ideal at the root of all healthycommunity. “The use of human service tools places a person at risk of a reduced sense ofself-worth, poverty, segregation from community life, and disempowerment as a citizen”(109).Role restriction based on organizational purpose is different than the kind of internalspecialization described in the previous section. Accounting is a function. Being hungryis not a function exactly, which is why I have called it a shadow role. But the overallprinciple is the same and the effect that the organization’s shadow role has on everyoneinvolved is perhaps even deeper. The organization has chosen to concern itself with onlya small part of the human experience – a particular and accidental circumstance. This istrue not only of problem-solving organizations like food banks or drug rehabilitationcenters. It is also true of organizations driven by a more developmental vision of society,for example schools. While the pursuit of learning may feel more expansive than theeradication of hunger, insofar as we only see people as students (and not just in a generalsense, but from within the specific institutional framework in which we find ourselves)the same tendency to instrumentalize them to organizational purposes and to deny anypart of them that does not fit those purposes seems to exist. Does this mean that it isimpossible to work on a particular social issue in a truly engaging way? We’ll turn to thatquestion shortly.Meaning and Association: The Problem of OnenessThere are, of course, social change organizations that see themselves as serving the entireperson, not just a given need or aspect. But instead of focusing on a particular dimensionof a person they focus on a particular kind of person. Social change efforts have focusedon class, occupation, gender, race and ethnicity, religion, and sexual orientation amongother things (Tilly 2004). The “new social movements” of the last few decades inparticular focus on segmented identities and lifestyle issues more than on the traditionalclass identities and political/economic issues (though how “new” these types ofmovement are is a matter of dispute) (Polletta and Jasper 2001). Identity movements aremeant to be omni-dimensional. While an organization or initiative might focus on a givenissue (voting rights, equal access to employment, etc.), at root they are driven by animplicit vision of personal development and fulfillment for the category of people theyserve.Identity movements provoke the comparison and closure described by social identitytheory. An identity movement starts out with a vision not of exclusion but of equality andinclusion. It seeks balance in an unbalanced world. It says, we have been left out - let usin. But the constant emphasis on group solidarity and differences with other groups canlead to a violation of the oneness principle and thus a profound sense of disengagement.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200747When successful, frames make a compelling case for the “injustice” of thecondition and the likely effectiveness of collective “agency” in changing thatcondition. They also make clear the “identities” of the contenders, distinguishing“us” from “them” and depicting antagonists as human decision makers ratherthan impersonal forces such as urbanization. (Polletta and Jasper 2001: 291)Similarly to the issue-focused perspectives described above, identity-focusedperspectives would seem to leave us no room for radical engagement.Patchwork and UtopiaThe implication of the fullness/oneness paradigm seems, at first glance, to say that onlymovements and organizations that are about everything and for everyone can be trulyengaging. By framing their claims in absolute terms, such universal social change effortsseem to avoid both issue-based and identity-based contradictions. I can think of threesuch frames:1. Religious frames – rooted in some version of complete transcendental fulfillment.Open to, and often explicitly evangelizing toward, everyone.2. Utopian frames – meant to establish earthly and or transcendental fulfillment via aprototype of a perfected social system. Again, while such frames may be givenlife in very small intentional communities, these communities are meant to serveas examples for everyone.3. Systemic or revolutionary frames – focused on institutional change. While theymay not operate specifically out of an idea of personal fullness, they are seekingto change the institutional parameters within which people live – presumablyguided by a tacit sense of what it means to live a good, full life. Earlyrevolutionary social movements (e.g., the French revolution) and modernenvironmental and anti-globalization movements might be seen in this way. Allsuch movements, in theory if not in practice, seek to serve everyone – that is, theirpicture of institutional reform is generally couched in universalist terms.In the end, however, these universal frames also end up being self-defeating in terms ofengagement. They too fall into the identity trap. While they don’t focus on any particulardimension or group, they have a subtler way of creating ‘us’ and ‘them.’ The dividingline is the frame itself. Do you believe it? Do you accept it wholeheartedly? Or do youhave an alternative way of looking at things? Those who believe it are the in-group.Those who don’t are the out-group. The social identity mechanism kicks in and we’reright back where we started: disconnected from each other, disengaged from what mattersmost.Where do these seemingly overwhelming contradictions leave us in terms of our socialchange efforts? If we want to have movements and organizations that wrestle withmeaning, that try to explore healthy ways of reshaping the world, where can we turn?Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200748Radical ExpressionFrom Social Identity to OnenessLet’s consider an organization focused on a fairly small subset of the world – adults withdevelopmental disabilities. The Planned Lifetime Advocacy Network (PLAN) wasfounded in 1989 as a response to several parents’ growing discomfort with theinstitutional boundaries hemming in their adult children with developmental disabilities(Nilsson 2003). These parents were faced with the fact that their children were going tooutlive them. They were becoming less and less comfortable with the idea that an array ofsocial workers, psychiatrists, and advocates might one day be the only form ofcommunity that their children would have left. PLAN was formed to facilitatedevelopment of authentic, messy communities of relationship around the “people at thecentre” as the sons and daughters came to be called.The approach to social change of the people who founded PLAN was initially informedby their experience with public advocacy. Like many identity-based initiatives, theirwork had been framed in terms of rights for the particular group of people with whomthey were concerned. They were the survivors of many political battles and were skilledat traditional forms of identity and inclusion debates, but now they wanted somethingdifferent. Their success in these debates was in many ways responsible for theinstitutionalized, professionalized world in which their children now largely moved.The first great epiphany that the parents had was that they needed to move beyond theirprotective, defensive stance and ask themselves, “What is it we really want for ourchildren?” More simply, they asked, “What is a good life?”. This gentle question ledPLAN to become one of the most creative and powerful social change organizations inCanada.What is a good life? The question is more important than the answer. PLAN came todescribe a good life in terms of financial security, home, relationships, and contribution.But what is signal here is not the particular collection of nouns, but the engagement withthe ‘why.’ Why are we doing this work? At its root, what does it mean? PLAN had begunto reframe its work in terms of radical values. These values are radical in that they are atthe root of the human (general) and the organizational (specific) experience. And they areradical because they suggest a profound change, a beautiful disruption of the world as weknow it. Strikingly, the “client” identity has been transcended. An encounter with radicalvalues always leads us to universals – if not universal truths, at least universal questionsand experiments. PLAN’s good life is not a good life just for people with developmentaldisabilities. It is a good life for us all. The organization in essence, if not in form, isserving everyone. (Interestingly, as PLAN grew more aware of the universal nature of itswork, it developed an explicit organizational counterpart, Philia, to explore “good life”themes couched in terms of citizenship and inclusion from the perspective of society as awhole.)PLAN is not special in this respect. Any identity-based organization can find at its centersome version of ultimate meaning – the good life – that will infuse the organization’sWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200749work if it is allowed to. The effect of this infusion is that the power of the social identitymechanism is greatly weakened and in happy moments even transcended. This does notmean that the identity that has proved to be so resonant for the people involved(disability, race, gender, geography, interest) should be rejected. Instead it should betraveled through so profoundly that it becomes a doorway. I discover that at the core ofmy identity (my specificity) are the atoms that connect me to everyone else.From Group Identity to FullnessAnd what of issue-focused organizations? A similar possibility is open to us in them. Inoted before that on the surface, issue-based organizations are for everyone. After all,everyone needs to eat, have a job, be educated, etc. The problem with issue-focusedorganizations is not that they contradict oneness, but that they contradict fullness. Theyprovoke a narrow sort of interaction, similar to a rigid role dynamic. In suchorganizations, radical value mining will lead us to discover that the organization’smission does not, in fact, exclude the infinite dimensions of the self. Santropol Roulant,for example, is about food. It is about feeding hungry people who are disconnected fromcommunity. And yet the person who is hungry there never becomes just a “hungryperson.” Why not? Santropol Roulant manages the dizzying feat of simultaneouslyunderstanding food as a tangible thing and an ineffable truth. They make muffins so thatpeople can eat them, but other things are eaten there as well. Any kind of hunger isimportant at the Roulant. Any opportunity to nourish is welcome.At work here is a process of deep metaphor – not the kind of metaphor concerned withtrivial similarities, but the kind of radical metaphor upon which everything depends. TheRoulant is primally interested in growing community and community can be fed in anynumber of ways. We all need physical nourishment, but we also need nourishment inother forms: psychological, creative, relational, spiritual, and so on. At the level of deepmetaphor, any one human dimension or need is a symbol for every other dimension orneed. In this way, fullness is met. Fiona delivers meals to Mr. Vinettzi. As is the way ofthe Roulant, they talk to each other not as server and client, but as, in fact, Fiona and Mr.Vinettzi. In doing so, they discover a shared love for making music. And soon, they arespending time together playing guitar and singing and exchanging songs that they havewritten. They make musical food for each other, and Mr. Vinettzi’s regular supper is notdisturbed by this. It sits on the table waiting its turn.Organizational PoetryAt work here is a particular relationship with meaning. It is the poet’s relationship, whereaccidents become universals. In each detail there is a wholeness. A specific identityinvokes all identities. A specific function reveals all functions. This is not just fancifullanguage. Poets do not write fiction. The poet knows that the universe actually iscontained in the blade of grass if you train yourself to look for it.Paradoxically, this sort of contact with universals also avoids the ideology trap. Theideology trap occurs when the universal replaces the specific. I invest my version of theWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200750“truth,” my system, with a false completeness and then use that truth to separate myselffrom the non-believers. Real human beings, real relationships are interesting to me onlyinsofar as they exemplify my system. What we’re talking about here, however, at aSantropol Roulant or a PLAN, is a complete inversion of that dynamic. We start with realpeople in living contexts, and slowly (and always incompletely) come to the universal bydiscovering connections. The more radically we engage with an identity or need or task,the more we see its relationship to other identities needs and tasks. We come tounderstand it as an expression of something more fundamental. But we can see that ouronly way of continuing to access that fundamental thing is by being engaged in ongoing,living relationships, with ourselves and with each other. The truth here is anchored in thespecifics of the day, the person, the encounter, even the identity.Coherence RestoredA funny thing happens to an organization’s sense of mission when it begins to understandthe radical, universal nature of its work. If that work is in fact an expression of somefundamental wholeness, if it is about everything and for everyone, then not only does mysense of what I’m doing change, but so does my sense of whom I’m doing it for. On thesurface, I serve a given target group or client base, but if what I’m doing has meaning foreveryone, in some sense, my “client” becomes anyone who walks in the door – staff,funders, neighbors, etc. You are my client, whoever you might be and, in fact, I am myclient too. We have transcended the instrumentality paradigm, the giving arrow hasbecome a giving field. I was talking to a Santropol Roulant volunteer once who told methat he often felt guilty when delivering meals. I asked him why, and he said it wasbecause it was so clear to him that he was doing it for his own reasons – that he did itbecause of what he got out of it (relaxation, meeting people, getting out into the world ina way normally not available to him). To me this seemed to be a sign of greatorganizational health: a confusion around who was giving to whom. That kind ofconfusion is miraculous. We need more of it.Imagine a school that sees itself as a nexus for learning and growth, not just for students,but for teachers, parents, trustees, neighbors, support staff, administrators, bus drivers. Ifthis school pursues its radical values after all, it will find that they have something to dowith creative multi-dimensional growth of human beings (fullness). Here is a place todevelop one’s mind, to connect with history, to explore culture and politics, to engage inmusic and art, to play. But how closed this energy feels, how diminished, when it isaimed at a subset of the community, and when the rest of the community is simply theinstrument for delivering it. If, instead, every relationship in the school is meant toexpress, however imperfectly, a learning/ teaching dynamic for everyone involved, whatcould be more fruitful? What could be more efficient? What could be more engaging?We have recognized the fullness at the heart of this work. We have recognized theoneness in terms of whom it is for. We still look like a school. Nothing at first may bevisibly different. But the thing feels entirely new and has entirely new social changeeffects. The school has become a place where everyone is not only a learner but a teacher.And teaching, for 5 year olds as much as for chaired professors, is the profoundest way ofWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200751learning and perhaps of building community itself. Such a school, such an organization,would be radically coherent.To take another non-obvious example, imagine an environmental organization thatpursues this course. What are its radical values? How can it work toward coherence?Superficially, we might default to an integrity model where the environmentalorganization uses low energy florescent light bulbs and recycles its office paper, but theseare explicate reflections of its surface values, not implicate reflections of its radicalvalues. What does an environmental organization ultimately want? It wants a sustainablerelationship between our planet and ourselves. Any healthy ecology has two keydynamics. First, everything is interconnected and those interconnections are honored andcultivated even though we can’t possibly understand all of their implications and effects.Waste equals food, as William McDonough says. The output of any given life is the inputof other lives. This is, in fact, the principle of oneness at work. What would it mean in anorganization? It would mean that role and group boundaries were permeable, that therewere countless possibilities for interaction, that the strange encounter was cultivated.The second key dynamic of ecology is diversity. Resilience and the capacity for adaptiveinnovation require myriad forms of life. Ecologists understand the value of the beetle andthe spotted owl. They know that these unlikely creatures play important roles in thesystem even though we might not be perfectly clear as to what those roles actually entail.A sustainable organization, too, cultivates diversity, not simply as a visible mix of racesor professions, but as a radical wildness filled with peculiar creatures: us. Our realdiversity is only apparent and useful when there is room for all of the different quirks andcharacteristics that make each of us in a manner of speaking our own species. Asustainable organization knows that the grumpy old man in the basement office who hasbeen there since 1972 has value even if that value is not easily apparent. This is theprinciple of fullness, that every part of every one of us matters. Once again, we havediscovered that, at its radical heart, this particular social change organization is abouteverything and everyone. And, again, the specific contextual embodiment of theseprinciples – in this case an environmental organization – offers us a very pleasingprospect.Expressive ChangeThe organization as it seeks radical coherence begins to develop a new way of pursuingits social change mission. I have described the typical social change approach asinstrumental. The people involved and the organization as a whole are seen asinstruments for effecting change. They are important and interesting only insofar as theymove us towards this change goal. They bear no more relationship to the goal than a cardoes to the city it takes you to. Instrumental approaches to change work quite naturally atthe explicate level of form. They can be used to provide services or change behaviors,processes, laws, and articulated belief systems of various types. But social change effortsinterested in systemic change need to go beyond the level of form and work to changefundamental relationship patterns. After all, society is essentially a relationship pattern. Ifyou want to teach a child to be compassionate towards others, you have to start by beingWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200752compassionate toward the child. You can discuss compassion, give rational reasons for it,refer to examples of it, describe how it works, but if in the meantime you exhibit nocompassion yourself, you are unlikely to help the child become compassionate.Relationships teach relationships.The social change organization that rejects the instrumental approach and cultivates thekind of relational coherence I have described can be thought of as an expressiveorganization. Similarly a social movement with an approach rooted in coherence can bethought of as an expressive movement. The word ‘expressive’ here has several meanings:• The organization is an expression of the relationship pattern it is trying to nurturein the world. While it may have objectives related to specific policies, publicawareness, various metrics, etc., it is those objectives that are instrumental, notthe organization itself. The organization is seen as a living community in which,however haltingly and imperfectly, the overall change “mission” is meant to berealized on a daily basis in the present.• Each relationship within the organization expresses this foundational relationalpattern. Just as the organization as a whole is not instrumental, no relationshipwithin it is instrumental. This is the fractal geometry typical of complex adaptivesystems, a holographic structure in which at any level or from any perspective therelational structure looks the same. So, an expressive organization will try its bestto live its radical values in every encounter. Every relationship would be seen asequally important in this respect. The minimum number of people for thisrelationship pattern to be invoked is two. Two is where relationships begin. It isthe atom of organization. Any combination of staff, clients/customers, suppliers,funders, volunteers, board members, neighbors, etc. is understood to be the wholesocial system in microcosm. Similarly the organization is holographic at any levelof analysis. What is true of individual and group relationships within theorganization is also true at the interorganizational level.• The organization’s understanding of its own purpose, no matter how narrowlydefined on the surface, is seen as expressive of more essential, universal meanings(disability advocacy becomes the pursuit of the “good life”; food becomesnourishment becomes community becomes fullness and oneness, etc.).• The organization is understood to be a fertile ground for self-expression. One ofits primary goals is to create a kind of relational space in which individuals candevelop themselves. Each person’s development is idiosyncratic and theorganization makes room for this.What can we say about the dynamics of expressive change? The stance towards theorganization and person is clearly different than the more typical instrumental stance. Buthow does this stance lead to change and what sort of change does it create? In detail, thatis a topic for another paper. But we can briefly sketch out a few ways of describingexpressive change that make logical and intuitive sense.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200753Radiant. Expressive change would be omni-directional. The change would spreadin full through each relationship. Instrumental change, in contrast, is linear,targeted. Each relationship plays its part in moving the system along a given linetoward a particular goal.Inter-organizationally holistic. The collaborative dynamic between organizationswould mirror the engaging relationship dynamic between individuals.Organizations would interact with each other as “whole organizations,” each withits own personality, its own sense of development. The primary collaborativepattern in expressive change would involve not instrumental, narrow, interestbased coalitions, networks, roundtables, etc., but communities of organizationsrelating in all sorts of ways from fleeting engagement to long-termcompanionship.Unmediated. Personal and inter-organizational relationships would not bemediated through leadership. An expressive organization would have whatThomas Pettzinger calls a large “surface area” (1999). Most, if not all, of theorganization’s members would be in contact with other organizations in variousrich ways.Dialogic. Meaning frames would not compete for dominance. They wouldinteract with each other with a goal of generating new, broader, sharedperspectives. This, in fact, is Dialogue at the macro-level, a societal conversationlarge enough to hold different perspectives together, not through narrowconsensus-building, but through discovering connections at a more profoundlevel, connections that are deep enough to hold together apparently diverseinterpretations of the world. If one of the difficulties faced when confrontinginstitutional change is that our previous mental models interfere with our ability toconsider alternatives, then Dialogue offers a way to set those models aside, if onlytemporarily, in order to consider new perspectives. Interestingly, this dialogicinteraction of meanings both builds off of and offers an alternative to much of thework of current social change theorists. The exploration of “framing processes”is becoming more prevalent in the literature on social movements (Benford andSnow 2000). Much of the literature conceives of institutional change as occurringvia a process of competition and negotiation among various frames. Hensmans(2003) explicitly connects social movement theory with institutional strategy,seeing such strategy as driven by “ideological actors” contesting various “sensemakingpossibilities in a field” and attempting to “maintain or gain the power toorganize” these “archetypical possibilities.” While Hensmans demonstrates thatsocial movement theory provides a useful set of analogies for understandinginstitutional change strategies, he suffers from the same narrowness found in moreconventional institutional strategy literature. That is, he still largely assumes thatindividual actors are aware of their own explanations or frames and are capable ofusing them in a kind of “combat.” Dialogue, on the other hand, does not assumethat individual frames are apparent; it assumes that these frames will graduallyWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200754emerge through shared conversation. And it does not assume competition amongframes. Instead, it assumes that deeper understandings and richer generativeenergies are created when various frames interact, when they “cooperate,” as itwere, to develop a shared (though not univocal) sense of meaning.The above is just a preliminary sketch of some of the possible features of expressivechange. I’ve arrived at these features deductively, but field research that exploredexpressive organizations and movements might be able to answer more fundamentalquestions about the dynamics, impact, and ultimate effectiveness of expressive change asit compares to instrumental change. The change approach known as Appreciative Inquiry(Cooperrider 1986; Cooperrider and Srivastava 1987; Cooperrider and Whitney 2002;Morris and Schiller 2003) might be one example of a very deliberate, essentiallyexpressive process that is currently being used in a number of organizational andcommunity settings. Appreciative Inquiry essentially creates institutional change byhaving people work with each other to discover and nurture root-level relational patternsthat are, using the framework of this paper, radically engaging. It has achieved notablesuccess in altering recalcitrant institutional patterns. There are undoubtedly other fieldcontexts in which something like an expressive approach is implicitly being used, eitherfor internal organizational development or for broader social initiatives. The work thatnaturally follows from this paper is the work of identifying and mining such contexts togive some inductive heft to the rather elaborate deductive framework I have developedhere.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200755IV. The UnbindingThe literary critic Harold Bloom describes American poetry after Emerson as being heldtogether by a shared stance: “Everything that can be broken should be broken” (1977). Ithink this is a helpful stance, even a holy one. Bloom admiringly calls it “Gnostic,” whichI take to involve not just suspicion of but disbelief in anything material, worldly,transitory. The powerful ‘should’ in the sentence tells us that we are being distractedfrom what is true by all of the various breakable forms that populate the world. And sothe breaking becomes a sacred effort. The broken thing becomes a revelation.In my work with engaging organizations, the thing that has become most clear to me isthat one can’t create engagement, one can only release it. The question we need to askourselves is not “What should we do?” but “What should we undo?” The call is todiscover what binds us.This call is more slippery than it sounds. I recently spent some time in Boston with anorganization called The Food Project. The Food Project brings urban and suburban youthtogether to grow and distribute organic produce. The project operates a 30-acre farm halfan hour outside of Boston and two unlikely urban gardens contentedly flourishing inDorchester, one of Boston’s most distressed neighborhoods. One rainy Saturday morning,I went to visit the largest urban lot, where I found two dozen teenagers happily pullingweeds from the mud, giving the October tomatoes and cabbages new room to breathe.Mid-morning, I had a long conversation with a 16-year-old whom I will call Jamal.I had heard about Jamal the day before from some of the project staff. They describedhim as a tough but charming natural leader who had grown up roaming the streets ofDorchester, if not in trouble then frequently at trouble’s edge. When he first joined TheFood Project, he had a difficult time. He was used to navigating relationships withchallenge and bravado, a rhythm that did not suit the respectful, gentle culture cultivatedby the organization. He later said that where he came from, you had to “act like a lion” ifyou wanted to survive. The Food Project was apparently uninterested in lions. Theykicked him out. After a few months he decided to reapply, putting himself under evenmore scrutiny. This time something took. When I met him he had moved through thesummer program and was now one of a select group interning with the project during theschool year.He shook my hand with some hesitation but flashed a warm and peculiar smile that mademe think the only thing he was shy about was revealing how confident he actually felt.Throughout the conversation he seemed at ease but slightly bemused, as if his ownsureness surprised him. We talked about many things, but Jamal kept returning to theeffect that his engagement with The Food Project had had on him. He described theorganization as “an open circle” and used the word ‘safety’ frequently. (My experienceswith organizations like these are leading me to believe that there is no safer structure inthe world than “an open circle,” despite our anxieties to the contrary.) He said that if youcome to the project with “the right mind,” you can discover “the positive you,” and heWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200756contrasted the old aggressive, “nagging” version of himself, with the new kinder, morepeaceful version. He said that the new version felt real.One of Jamal’s issues the first time through the project was that he had little patience forrules or direction. He told me, “I don’t really like people dictating to me. I’m a leader, nota follower.” During the first weeks he frequently received “violations” for things likelateness and talking to people disrespectfully. He was unhappy. The organization was toostrict. Someone was always “on his neck,” and he told himself, “This has to stop.” Thiswas right before he was kicked out.Frankly, I was sympathetic to the “old” Jamal. Despite the contented air of the place, oneof the things that first struck me about The Food Project was the apparent rigidity of therules and principles, not just for the teenagers, but for the staff, who in almost everyconversation turned ‘accountability’ and ‘hard work’ into twin mantras. After myexperience with Santropol Roulant, I was somewhat confused. The Food Project did havea vibrancy all its own. It felt alive and authentic, but not in the way that I was used to,and certainly not with the forms I was used to. Jamal continued: “Now the rules arenothing. I don’t think about them. We’re all equal. No one is watching me. We’re all outhere getting dirty.” He studied the soil under his fingernails then resumed pulling weeds.It is natural for us to think of stern organizational policies as constrictions: things thatkeep us from being authentic with ourselves and each other. Often they are. The work ofunbinding our organization may typically involve relaxing or revoking various policiesrules and procedures. Jamal, however, was bound by a much stricter code than The FoodProject’s. Before coming there, he was subject to a very narrow set of behavioral rulesinvolving distance, sarcasm, aggression. Perhaps one of his rules was, “Don’t be ontime.” Perhaps being on time was a weakness, a capitulation. If so, Jamal’s inner “don’tbe on time” rule was what was binding him. If poetry is the art of making the worldstrange so that we can see it anew, “be on time” was poetry for Jamal. Being on timeallowed him to be more authentic, not less. It allowed him to be freer.Don’t mistake this idea for cheap apologetics. It does not imply that all rules, or evenmost, are liberating. To an accountant who has been on time every day of his life for thelast 30 years, “be on time” may well be what binds him. “Don’t be on time” is what willunbind him. Any form – any role, group, rule, procedure, etc. – can be binding. Any formcan be poetry. And what is poetry one day might become cliché the next. The work ofunbinding involves constant attentiveness toward what is in the way of fullness andoneness. To unbind an organization (or yourself) you must think like a poet.Hannah Arendt (1998) distinguishes between ‘labor’, ‘work’, and ‘action’. Labor is theendless activity of maintaining ourselves biologically. Nothing permanent arises fromlabor. Work involves fabricating our physical and social spaces apart from nature. Workproduces things of semi-permanence, but it is instrumental. It is not ultimately freebecause the work itself is subordinate to its ends. It is not a creative, expressive act in andof itself – only in terms of its output. Action is the ultimate form of creativity. It involvesour capacity for newness – not for creating new things, but for being new ourselves.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200757The life span of man running toward death would inevitably carry everythinghuman to ruin and destruction if it were not for the faculty of interrupting it andbeginning something new, a faculty which is inherent in action like an everpresentreminder that men, though they must die, are not born in order to die butin order to begin . . . Action, seen from the viewpoint of the automatic processeswhich seem to determine the course of the world, looks like a miracle. In thelanguage of natural science, it is the “infinite improbability which occursregularly.” (246)To be unbound, organizations need to become places of action not of work. Arendt saysthat action can only occur when people are together. “Only action is entirely dependentupon the constant presence of others” (23). Action is the resolution of thefullness/oneness paradox. Action is the process through which we become entirelyourselves and yet unite finally and completely with each other.If Arendt is right, action is not something we need to do, it is something we need merelyto allow. It is natural to us. Wil, one of the staffers at The Food Project, told me that hesaw the organization as “a safe place for people to become who they are.” This statementposes an interesting problem for the logician, but it sounds just right to me. I began thispaper with my father-in-law, Jim. I will end it with him too. As a landscape architect, Jimhas a favorite method for deciding where to put a path across any open lawn or field. Hedoesn’t look for the shortest route or for the most beautiful route or for the mostecologically sensitive route. In fact, he doesn’t choose the route at all. He simply waits.He watches people move through the landscape. He lets them walk where they want towalk. Over time, last week’s footsteps and this week’s footsteps begin to make sense ofeach other, scribing a deepening pattern in the grass. Then Jim takes out his tools andfashions a path in the perfect place. He puts it where it already is.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200758ReferencesAbrams, D. and M. A. Hogg (1990). An Introduction to the Social Identity Approach.Social Identity Theory: Constructive and Critical Advances. D. Abrams and M. A.Hogg. New York, Harvester Wheatsheaf.Abrams, M. H. (1953). The mirror and the lamp: romantic theory and the criticaltradition. New York, Oxford University Press.Aiken, M. and J. Hage (1966). "Organizational Alienation: A Comparative Analysis."American Sociological Review 31(4): 497-507.Allcorn, S. (1995). "Understanding Organizational Culture as the Quality of WorkplaceSubjectivity." Human Relations 48(1): 73.Arendt, H. (1998). The Human Condition. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.Ashforth, B. E. and F. Mael (1989). "Social Identity Theory and the Organization."Academy of Management Review 14(1): 20.Barnard, C. (1968). The Functions of the Executive. Cambridge, Massachusetts, HarvardUniversity Press.Benefiel, M. (2003). "Irreconcilable foes? The Discourse of Spirituality and theDiscourse of Organizational Science." Organization 10(2): 383.Berger, P. L. and T. Luckmann (1967). The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise inthe Sociology of Knowledge. Garden City, N.Y., Anchor Books.Bloom, H. (1977). Wallace Stevens: The Poems of our Climate. Ithaca, New York,Cornell University Press.Bohm, D. (1980). Wholeness and the Iimplicate Order. London, Boston & Henley,Routledge & Kegan Paul.Borgatti, S. P. and P. Foster (2003). "The Network Paradigm in Organizational Research:A Review and Typology." Journal of Management 26(9): 991-1013.Brewer, M. B. and W. Gardner (1996). "Who Is This "We"? Levels of Collective Identityand Self Representations." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 71: 83-93.Brown, G., T. Lawrence, et al. (2005). "Territoriality in Organizations." Academy ofManagement Review 30(3): 577.Burke, P. J. (1997). "An Identity Model for Network Exchange." American SociologicalReview 62(1): 134.Burt, R. S. (1992). Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition. Cambridge,Massachusetts, Harvard University Press.Calas, M. B. and L. Smircich (1996). From 'The Woman's' Point of View: FeministApproaches to Organization Studies. Handbook of Organization Studies. S. R.Clegg, C. Hardy and W. Nord. London, Sage.Cerulo, K. A. (1997). "Identity Construction: New Issues, New Directions." AnnualReview of Sociology 23: 385.Chavis, D. M., J. H. Hogge, et al. (1986). "Sense of Community through Brunswick'sLens: A First Look." Journal of Community Psychology 14(1): 24-40.Clemens, E. S. (1996). Organizational Form as Frame: Collective Identity and PoliticalStrategy in the American Labor Movement, 1880-1920. Comparative Perspectiveson Social Movements: Political Opportunities, Mobilizing Structures, andWarren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200759Cultural Frames. D. McAdam, J. D. McCarthy and M. N. Zald. Cambridge,Cambridge University Press.Cooperrider, D. L. (1986). Appreciative Inquiry: Toward a Methodology forUnderstanding and Enhancing Organizational Innovation. Cleveland, CaseWestern Reserve University.Cooperrider, D. L. and Srivastava (1987). Appreciative Inquiry in Organizational Life.Research in Organization Change and Development. W. Pasmore and R.Woodman. Greenwich, CT, JAI Press. 1: 129-169.Cooperrider, D. L. and D. Whitney (2002). A Positive Revolution in Change:Appreciative Inquiry, (Draft).Crossley, N. (2003). "Even Newer Social Movements? Anti-Corporate Protests,Capitalist Crises and the Remoralization of Society." Organization 10(2): 287-305.Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. New York,Harper & Row.Csikszentmihalyi, M. and J. LeFevre (1989). "Optimal Experience in Work and Leisure."Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 56(5): 815-822.Daly, H. E. (1996). Beyond Growth. Boston, Beacon Press.Daly, H. E., J. B. Cobb, et al. (1989). For the Common Good: Redirecting the EconomyToward Community, the Environment, and a Sustainable Future. Boston, BeaconPress.Deaux, K. and D. Martin (2003). "Interpersonal Networks and Social Categories:Specifying Levels of Context in Identity Processes." Social Psychology Quarterly66(2): 101-117.Diamond, M., S. Allcorn, et al. (2004). "The Surface of Organizational Boundaries: AView from Psychoanalytic Object Relations Theory." Human Relations 57(1): 31-53.DiMaggio, P. J. and W. W. Powell (1983). "The Iron Cage Revisited: InstitutionalIsomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields." AmericanSociological Review 48(April): 147-160.DiMaggio, P. J. and W. W. Powell (1991). Introduction. The New Institutionalism inOrganizational Analysis. P. DiMaggio and W. W. Powell. Chicago, University ofChicago Press: 1-38.Dolan, E. G. (1971). "Alienation, Freedom, and Economic Organization." Journal ofPolitical Economy 79(5): 1084-1094.Donaldson, L. (1996). The Normal Science of Structural Contingency Theory. Handbookof Organization Studies. S. Clegg, C. Hardy and W. Nord. London, Sage.Drazin, R., M. A. Glynn, et al. (1999). "Multilevel Theorizing About Creativity inOrganizations: A Sensemaking Perspective." Academy of Management Review24(2): 286-307.Elsbach, K. (1994). "Managing Organizational Legitmacy in the California CattleIndustry." Administrative Science Quarterly 39(1): 57-88.Emerson, R. W. (19xx). Circles. Selected Essays. asfd, asf.Emirbayer, M. (1997). "Manifesto for a Relational Sociology." American Journal ofSociology 103(2): 281.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200760Garcia-Zamor, J.-C. (2003). "Workplace Spirituality and Organizational Performance."Public Administration Review 63(3): 355.Giddens, A. (1984). The Constitution of Society. Berkeley, University of CaliforniaPress.Glisson, C. and M. Durick (1988). "Predictors of Job Satisfaction and OrganizationalCommitment in Human Service Organizations." Administrative Science Quarterly33(1): 61.Goffman, E. (1959). The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New York, AnchorBooks.Greve, H. R. (1995). "Jumping Ship: The Diffusion of Strategy Abandonment."Administrative Science Quarterly 40(3): 444-473.Gull, G. and J. Doh (2004). "The "Transmutation" of the Organization: Toward a MoreSpiritual Workplace." Journal of Management Inquiry 13(2): 128.Happold, F. C. (1964). Mysticism: A Study and an Anthology. New York, Penguin.Hawken, P. (1994). The Ecology of Commerce: A Declaration of Sustainability. NewYork, NY, HarperBusiness.Hawken, P. (2007). Blessed Unrest: How the Largest Movement in the World Came intoBeing and Why No One Saw It Coming. New York, Viking.Hawken, P., A. Lovins, et al. (1999). Natural Capitalism: Creating the Next IndustrialRevolution. Boston, Little, Brown and Company.Herzberg, F. (1966). Work and the Nature of Man. New York, Thomas Y. Crowell.Hochschild, A. R. (1983). The Managed heart: Commercialization of Human Feeling.Berkeley, University of California Press.Hogg, M. A. and D. Abrams (1988). Social Identifications: A Social Psychology ofIntergroup Relations and Group Processes. London, Routledge.Hogg, M. A. and D. J. Terry (2000). "Social Identity and Self-Categorization Processes inOrganizational Contexts." Academy of Management Review 25(1): 121-140.Hogg, M. A., D. J. Terry, et al. (1995). "A Tale of Two Theories: A Critical Comparisonof Identity Theory with Social Identity Theory." Social Psychology Quarterly58(4): 255.Holbrook, M. (2003). "Adventures in Complexity: An Essay on Dynamic Open ComplexAdaptive Systems, Butterfly Effects, Self-Organizing Order, Coevolution, theEcological Perspective, Fitness Landscapes, Market Spaces, Emergent Beauty atthe Edge of Chaos, and All That Jazz." Academy of Marketing Science Review2003: 1.Howard, J. A. (2000). "Social Psychology of Identities." Annual Review of Sociology 26:367-393.Isaacs, W. (1999). Dialogue and the Art of Thinking Together: A Pioneering Approach toCommunicating in Business and in Life. New York, Currency.Joshi, A. (2006). "The Influence of Organizational Demography on the ExternalNetworking Behavior of Teams." Academy of Management Review 31(3): 583-595.Kim, T.-Y., H. Oh, et al. (2006). "Framing Interorganizational Network Change: ANetwork Inertia Perspective." Academy of Management Review 31(3): 704-720.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200761King, S. and D. Nicol (1999). "Organizational Enhancement through Recognition ofIndividual Spirituality." Journal of Organizational Change Management 12(3):234-242.Klein, N. (2000). No Logo: Taking Aim at the Brand Bullies. New York, Picador USA.Knights, D. and G. Morgan (1990). "The Concept of Strategy in Sociology: A Note ofDissent." Sociology 24(3): 475-483.Knights, D. and G. Morgan (1991). "Corporate Strategy, Organizations, and Subjectivity:A Critique." Organization Studies 12(2): 251.Korten, D. C. (1995). When Corporations Rule the World. West Hartford, Conn.,Kumarian Press.Korten, D. C. (1999). "Corporate Futures." Yes! A Journal of Positive Futures(10).Lamont, M. and V. Molnar (2002). "The Study of Boundaries in the Social Sciences."Annual Review of Sociology 28: 167.Lounsbury, M. and M. Ventresca (2003). "The New Structuralism in OrganizationalTheory." Organization 10(3): 457-480.Mander, J. and E. Goldsmith, Eds. (1996). The Case Against the Global Economy and fora Turn Toward the Local. San Francisco, Sierra Club Books.Marcuse, H. (1964). One-Dimensional Man. Boston, Beacon.Marx, K. (1978). Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. The Marx--EngelsReader. R. C. Tucker. New York, W. W. Norton & Company.Mathieu, J. E. and D. M. Zajac (1990). "A Review and Meta-Analysis of theAntecedents, Correlates, and Consequences of Organizational Commitment."Psychological Bulletin 108(2): 171-194.McAdam, D., J. D. McCarthy, et al. (1996). Introduction: Opportunities, MobilizingStructures, and Framing Processes - Toward a Synthetic, Comparative Perspectiveon Social Movements. Comparative Perspectives on Social Movements: PoliticalOpportunities, Mobilizing Structures, and Cultural Frames. D. McAdam, J. D.McCarthy and M. N. Zald. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.McCall, G. J. and J. L. Simmons (1966). Identities and Interactions. New York, FreePress.McDowell, L., A. Batnitzky, et al. (2007). "Division, Segmentation, and Interpellation:The Embodied Labors of Migrant Workers in a Greater London Hotel." EconomicGeography 83(1): 1.McGregor (1960). Human Side of Enterprise. New York, McGraw-Hill.McKnight, J. (1995). The Careless Society: Community and Its Counterfeits. New York,Basic Books.Meyer, J. W. and B. Rowan (1977). "Institutionalized Organizations: Formal Structure asMyth and Ceremony." American Journal of Sociology 83(2): 340-363.Mintzberg, H. (1979). The Structuring of Organizations: A Synthesis of the Research.Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Prentice-Hall.Mintzberg, H. (1980). "Structure in 5's: A Synthesis of the Research on OrganizationDesign." Management Science 26(3): Mar.Mintzberg, H. (1989). Mintzberg on Management. New York, Free Press.Mitroff, I. I. (2003). "Do Not Promote Religion Uner the Guise of Spirituality."Organization 10(2): 375.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200762Mitroff, I. I. and E. A. Denton (1999). Spiritual Audit of Corporate America. SanFrancisco, Jossey-Bass.Mitroff, I. I. and E. A. Denton (1999). "A Study of Spirituality in the Workplace." SloanManagement Review 40(4): 83.Morris, D. and M. Schiller (2003). AI in Diversity Work: Avon Mexico,http://appreciativeinquiry.cwru.edu/practice/toolsCasesDetail.cfm?coid=3218.2004.Nilsson, W. O. (2003). Voice and Ground: Social Innovation at the Planned LifetimeAdvocacy Network (PLAN), McGill University (prepared as a working paper forthe McGill-Dupont Social Innovation Initiative).Nilsson, W. O. (2006). The Southern Wall: Organizational Engagement at SantropolRoulant. Montreal, Santropol Roulant.O'Connor, E. S. (1999). "The Politics of Management Thought: A Case Study of theHarvard Business School and the Human Relations School." Academy ofManagement Review 24(1): 117.Parkhe, A., S. Wasserman, et al. (2006). "New Frontiers in Network TheoryDevelopment." Academy of Management Review 31(3): 560-568.Perrow, C. (1986). Complex Organizations: A Critical Essay. New York, Random House.Petzinger, T. J. (1999). New Pioneers: The Men and Women Who Are Transforming theWorkplace and Marketplace. New York, Simon & Schuster.Polletta, F. and J. M. Jasper (2001). "Collective Identity and Social Movements." AnnualReview of Sociology 27: 283-305.Powell, W. W. and L. Smith-Doerr (1994). Networks and Economic Life. The Handbookof Economic Sociology. N. J. Smesler and R. Swedberg. Chicago, University ofChicago Press.Primeaux, P. and G. Vega (2002). "Operationalizing Maslow: Religion and Flow asBusines Partners." Journal of Business Ethics 38(1/2): 97.Ranson, S., B. Hinings, et al. (1980). "The Structuring of Organizational Structures."Administrative Science Quarterly 25(1).Saul, J. R. (1995). The Unconscious Civilization. Concord, Ontario, House of AnansiPress.Scott, W. R. (1987). "The Adolescence of Institutional Theory." Administrative ScienceQuarterly 32: 493-511.Scott, W. R. (1998). Organizations: Rational, Natural, and Open Systems. Upper SaddleRiver, N.J., Prentice Hall.Scott, W. R. (2001). Institutions and Organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA, SagePublications.Selznick, P. (1948). "Foundations of the Theory of Organization." American SociologicalReview 13(1): 25-35.Selznick, P. (1984a). Leadership in Administration. Berkley, University of CaliforniaPress.Selznick, P. (1984b). TVA and the Grass Roots: A Study of Politics and Organization.Berkley, University of California Press.Semler, R. (1989). "Managing Without Managers." Harvard BusinessReview(Septermber-October).Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200763Semler, R. (2003). The Seven-Day Weekend: Changing the Way Work Works. NewYork, Portfolio.Shipper, F. and C. S. Manz (1992). "Employee Self-Management Without FormallyDesignated Teams: An Alternative Road to Empowerment." OrganizationalDynamics 21(3): 48-61.Shiva, V. (2005). Earth Democracy: Justice, Sustainability, and Peace. Cambridge,Massachusetts, South End Press.Simon, H. (1997). Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes inOrganizations. New York, Free Press.Smith, H. (1991). The World's Religions: Our Great Wisdom Traditions. San Francisco,Harper San Francisco.Srinivas, N. (1999). "Managers as Androids: Reading Moral Agency in Philip Dick."Organization 6(4): 609-624.Stets, J. E. and P. Burke, J. (2000). "Identity Theory and Social Identity Theory." SocialPsychology Quarterly 63(3): 224-237.Suchman, M. C. (1995). "Managing Legitimacy: Strategic and Institutional Approaches."Academy of Management Review 20(3): 571-610.Swailes, S. (2002). "Organizational Commitment: A Critique of the Construct andMeasures." International Journal of Management Reviews 4(2): 155-178.Tajfel, H. (1970). "Experiments in Intergroup Discrimination." Scientific American 223:96-102.Tarrow, S. (1994). Power in Movement: Social Movements, Collective Action andPolitics. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.Taylor, C. (1989). Sources of the Self: The Making of the Modern Identity. Cambridge,Massachusetts, Harvard University Press.Taylor, C. (1991). The Malaise of Modernity. Don Mills, Ont., Anansi.Tichy, N. M. (1981). Networks in Organizations. Handbook of Organzational Design. P.C. Nystrom and W. H. Starbuck. New York, Oxford University Press. 2.Tillich, P. (1957). Dynamics of Faith. New York, Harper & Row.Tilly, C. (2004). Social Movements, 1768-2004. Boulder, Colorado, ParadigmPublishers.Tolbert, P. S. and L. G. Zucker (1996). The Instituionalization of Institutional Theory.Handbook of Organization Studies. S. Clegg, C. Hardy and W. Nord. London,Sage.Turner, J. C. (1999). Some Current Issues in Research on Social Identity and SelfcategorizationTheories. Social Identity. N. Ellemers, R. Spears and B. Doosje.Oxford, Blackwell Publishers.Underhill, E. (1990). Mysticism: A Study in the Nature and Development of SpiritualConsciousness. New York, Image Books.Weeks, J. and C. Galunic (2003). "A Theory of the Cultural Evolution of the Firm: TheIntra-organizational Ecology of Memes." Organization Studies 24(8): 1309.Weick, K. E. (1995). Sensemaking in Organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA, SagePublications.Wheatley, M. J. (2001). Leadership and the New Science. San Francisco, Berrrett-Koehler.Warren Nilsson, Organization Unbound, Working Paper, August 200764Whyte, D. (1994). The Heart Aroused: Poetry and the Preservation of the Soul inCorporate America. New York, Currency Doubleday.Yuki, M. (2003). "Intergroup Comparison Versus Intragroup Relationships: A Cross-Cultural Examination of Social Identity Theory in North American and EastAsian Cultural Context." Social Psychology Quarterly 66(2): 166-179.Zucker, L. G. (1977). "The Role of Institutionalization in Cultural Persistence." AmericanJournal of Sociology 42(October): 762-743.